On the Road
1
I first met Dean not long after my wife and I split up. I had just gotten over a serious illness that I
won't bother to talk about, except that it had something to do with the miserably weary split-up and
my feeling that everything was dead. With the coming of Dean Moriarty began the part of my life
you could call my life on the road. Before that I'd often dreamed of going West to see the country,
always vaguely planning and never taking off. Dean is the perfect guy for the road because he
actually was born on the road, when his parents were passing through Salt Lake City in 1926, in a
jalopy, on their way to Los Angeles. First reports of him came to me through Chad King, who'd
shown me a few letters from him written in a New Mexico reform school. I was tremendously
interested in the letters because they so naively and sweetly asked Chad to teach him all about
Nietzsche and all the wonderful intellectual things that Chad knew. At one point Carlo and I talked
about the letters and wondered if we would ever meet the strange Dean Moriarty. This is all far
back, when Dean was not the way he is today, when he was a young jailkid shrouded in mystery.
Then news came that Dean was out of reform school and was coming to New York for the first
time; also there was talk that he had just married a girl called Marylou.
One day I was hanging around the campus and Chad and Tim Gray told me Dean was staying in a
cold-water pad in East Harlem, the Spanish Harlem. Dean had arrived the night before, the first
time in New York, with his beautiful little sharp chick Marylou; they got off the Greyhound bus at
50th Street and cut around the corner looking for a place to eat and went right in Hector's, and since
then Hector's cafeteria has always been a big symbol of New York for Dean. They spent money on
beautiful big glazed cakes and creampuffs.
All this time Dean was telling Marylou things like this: "Now, darling, here we are in New York
and although I haven't quite told you everything that I was thinking about when we crossed
Missouri and especially at the point when we passed the Booneville reformatory which reminded
me of my jail problem, it is absolutely necessary now to postpone all those leftover things
concerning our personal lovethings and at once begin thinking of specific worklife plans . . ." and
so on in the way that he had in those early days.
I went to the cold-water flat with the boys, and Dean came to the door in his shorts. Marylou was
jumping off the couch; Dean had dispatched the occupant of the apartment to the kitchen, probably
to make coffee, while he proceeded with his loveproblems, for to him sex was the one and only
holy and important thing in life, although he had to sweat and curse to make a living and so on. You
saw that in the way he stood bobbing his head, always looking down, nodding, like a young boxer
to instructions, to make you think he was listening to every word, throwing in a thousand "Yeses" 
and "That's rights." My first impression of Dean was of a young Gene Autry-trim, thin-hipped,
blue-eyed, with a real Oklahoma accent-a sideburned hero of the snowy West. In fact he'd just been
working on a ranch, Ed Wall's in Colorado, before marrying Marylou and coming East. Marylou
was a pretty blonde with immense ringlets of hair like a sea of golden tresses; she sat there on the
edge of the couch with her hands hanging in her lap and her smoky blue country eyes fixed in a
wide stare because she was in an evil gray New York pad that she'd heard about back West, and
waiting like a longbodied emaciated Modigliani surrealist woman in a serious room. But, outside of
being a sweet little girl, she was awfully dumb and capable of doing horrible things. That night we
all drank beer and pulled wrists and talked till dawn, and in the morning, while we sat around
dumbly smoking butts from ashtrays in the gray light of a gloomy day, Dean got up nervously,
paced around, thinking, and decided the thing to do was to have Marylou make breakfast and sweep
the floor. "In other words we've got to get on the ball, darling, what I'm saying, otherwise it'll be
fluctuating and lack of true knowledge or crystallization of our plans." Then I went away.
During the following week he confided in Chad King that he absolutely had to learn how to write
from him; Chad said I was a writer and he should come to me for advice. Meanwhile Dean had
gotten a job in a parking lot, had a fight with Marylou in their Hoboken apartment-God knows why
they went there-and she was so mad and so down deep vindictive that she reported to the police
some false trumped-up hysterical crazy charge, and Dean had to lam from Hoboken. So he had no
place to live. He came right out to Paterson, New Jersey, where I was living with my aunt, and one
night while I was studying there was a knock on the door, and there was Dean, bowing, shuffling
obsequiously in the dark of the hall, and saying, "Hello, you remember me-Dean Moriarty? I've
come to ask you to show me how to write."
"And where's Marylou?" I asked, and Dean said she'd apparently whored a few dollars together and
gone back to Denver-"the whore!" So we went out to have a few beers because we couldn't talk like
we wanted to talk in front of my aunt, who sat in the living room reading her paper. She took one
look at Dean and decided that he was a madman.
In the bar I told Dean, "Hell, man, I know very well you didn't come to me only to want to become
a writer, and after all what do I really know about it except you've got to stick to it with the energy
of a benny addict." And he said, "Yes, of course, I know exactly what you mean and in fact all those
problems have occurred to me, but the thing that I want is the realization of those factors that
should one depend on Schopenhauer's dichotomy for any inwardly realized . . ." and so on in that
way, things I understood not a bit and he himself didn't. In those days he really didn't know what he
was talking about; that is to say, he was a young jailkid all hung-up on the wonderful possibilities
of becoming a real intellectual, and he liked to talk in the tone and using the words, but in a
jumbled way, that he had heard from "real intellectuals"-although, mind you, he wasn't so naive as
that in all other things, and it took him just a few months with Carlo Marx to become completely in 
there with all the terms and jargon. Nonetheless we understood each other on other levels of
madness, and I agreed that he could stay at my house till he found a job and furthermore we agreed
to go out West sometime. That was the winter of 1947.
One night when Dean ate supper at my house-he already had the parking-lot job in New York-he
leaned over my shoulder as I typed rapidly away and said, "Come on man, those girls won't wait,
make it fast."
I said, "Hold on just a minute, I'll be right with you soon as I finish this chapter," and it was one of
the best chapters in the book. Then I dressed and off we flew to New York to meet some girls. As
we rode in the bus in the weird phosphorescent void of the Lincoln Tunnel we leaned on each other
with fingers waving and yelled and talked excitedly, and I was beginning to get the bug like Dean.
He was simply a youth tremendously excited with life, and though he was a con-man, he was only
conning because he wanted so much to live and to get involved with people who would otherwise
pay no attention to him. He was conning me and I knew it (for room and board and "how-to-write,"
etc.), and he knew I knew (this has been the basis of our relationship), but I didn't care and we got
along fine-no pestering, no catering; we tiptoed around each other like heartbreaking new friends. I
began to learn from him as much as he probably learned from me. As far as my work was
concerned he said, "Go ahead, everything you do is great." He watched over my shoulder as I wrote
stories, yelling, "Yes! That's right! Wow! Man!" and "Phew!" and wiped his face with his
handkerchief. "Man, wow, there's so many things to do, so many things to write! How to even
begin to get it all down and without modified restraints and all hung-up on like literary inhibitions
and grammatical fears . . ."
"That's right, man, now you're talking." And a kind of holy lightning I saw flashing from his
excitement and his visions, which he described so torrentially that people in buses looked around to
see the "overexcited nut." In the West he'd spent a third of his time in the poolhall, a third in jail,
and a third in the public library. They'd seen him rushing eagerly down the winter streets,
bareheaded, carrying books to the poolhall, or climbing trees to get into the attics of buddies where
he spent days reading or hiding from the law.
We went to New York-I forget what the situation was, two colored girls-there were no girls there;
they were supposed to meet him in a diner and didn't show up. We went to his parking lot where he
had a few things to do-change his clothes in the shack in back and spruce up a bit in front of a
cracked mirror and so on, and then we took off. And that was the night Dean met Carlo Marx. A
tremendous thing happened when Dean met Carlo Marx. Two keen minds that they are, they took
to each other at the drop of a hat. Two piercing eyes glanced into two piercing eyes-the holy
con-man with the shining mind, and the sorrowful poetic con-man with the dark mind that is Carlo
Marx. From that moment on I saw very little of Dean, and I was a little sorry too. Their energies
met head-on, I was a lout compared, I couldn't keep up with them. 
The whole mad swirl of everything that was to come began then; it would mix up all my friends
and all I had left of my family in a big dust cloud over the American Night. Carlo told him of Old
Bull Lee, Elmer Hassel, Jane: Lee in Texas growing weed, Hassel on Riker's Island, Jane
wandering on Times Square in a benzedrine hallucination, with her baby girl in her arms and
ending up in Bellevue. And Dean told Carlo of unknown people in the West like Tommy Snark, the
clubfooted poolhall rotation shark and cardplayer and queer saint. He told him of Roy Johnson, Big
Ed Dunkel, his boyhood buddies, his street buddies, his innumerable girls and sex-parties and
pornographic pictures, his heroes, heroines, adventures. They rushed down the street together,
digging everything in the early way they had, which later became so much sadder and perceptive
and blank. But then they danced down the streets like dingledodies, and I shambled after as I've
been doing all my life after people who interest me, because the only people for me are the mad
ones, the ones who are mad to live, mad to talk, mad to be saved, desirous of everything at the same
time, the ones who never yawn or say a commonplace thing, but burn, burn, burn like fabulous
yellow roman candles exploding like spiders across the stars and in the middle you see the blue
centerlight pop and everybody goes "Awww!" What did they call such young people in Goethe's
Germany? Wanting dearly to learn how to write like Carlo, the first thing you know, Dean was
attacking him with a great amorous soul such as only a con-man can have. "Now, Carlo, let me
speak-here's what Fm saying ..." I didn't see them for about two weeks, during which time they
cemented their relationship to fiendish allday-allnight-talk proportions.
Then came spring, the great time of traveling, and everybody in the scattered gang was getting
ready to take one trip or another. I was busily at work on my novel and when I carne to the halfway
mark, after a trip down South with my aunt to visit my brother Rocco, I got ready to travel West for
the very first time.
Dean had already left. Carlo and I saw him off at the 34th Street Greyhound station. Upstairs they
had a place where you could make pictures for a quarter. Carlo took off his glasses and looked
sinister. Dean made a profile shot and looked coyly around. I took a straight picture that made me
look like a thirty-year-old Italian who'd kill anybody who said anything against his mother. This
picture Carlo and Dean neatly cut down the middle with a razor and saved a half each in their
wallets. Dean was wearing a real Western business suit for his big trip back to Denver; he'd finished
his first fling in New York. I say fling, but he only worked like a dog in parking lots. The most
fantastic parking-lot attendant in the world, he can back a car forty miles an hour into a tight
squeeze and stop at the wall, jump out, race among fenders, leap into another car, circle it fifty
miles an hour in a narrow space, back swiftly into tight spot, hump, snap the car with the
emergency so that you see it bounce as he flies out; then clear to the ticket shack, sprinting like a
track star, hand a ticket, leap into a newly arrived car before the owner's half out, leap literally
under him as he steps out, start the car with the door flapping, and roar off to the next available spot, 
arc, pop in, brake, out, run; working like that without pause eight hours a night, evening rush hours
and after-theater rush hours, in greasy wino pants with a frayed fur-lined jacket and beat shoes that
flap. Now he'd bought a new suit to go back in; blue with pencil stripes, vest and all-eleven dollars
on Third Avenue, with a watch and watch chain, and a portable typewriter with which he was going
to start writing in a Denver rooming house as soon as he got a job there. We had a farewell meal of
franks and beans in a Seventh Avenue Riker's, and then Dean got on the bus that said Chicago and
roared off into the night. There went our wrangler. I promised myself to go the same way when
spring really bloomed and opened up the land.
And this was really the way that my whole road experience began, and the things that were to come
are too fantastic not to tell.
Yes, and it wasn't only because I was a writer and needed new experiences that I wanted to know
Dean more, and because my life hanging around the campus had reached the completion of its
cycle and was stultified, but because, somehow, in spite of our difference in character, he reminded
me of some long-lost brother; the sight of his suffering bony face with the long sideburns and his
straining muscular sweating neck made me remember my boyhood in those dye-dumps and
swim-holes and riversides of Paterson and the Passaic. His dirty workclothes clung to him so
gracefully, as though you couldn't buy a better fit from a custom tailor but only earn it from the
Natural Tailor of Natural Joy, as Dean had, in his stresses. And in his excited way of speaking I
heard again the voices of old companions and brothers under the bridge, among the motorcycles,
along the wash-lined neighborhood and drowsy doorsteps of afternoon where boys played guitars
while their older brothers worked in the mills. All my other current friends were
"intellectuals"-Chad the Nietzschean anthropologist, Carlo Marx and his nutty surrealist low-voiced
serious staring talk, Old Bull Lee and his critical anti-every-thing drawl-or else they were slinking
criminals like Elmer Hassel, with that hip sneer; Jane Lee the same, sprawled on the Oriental cover
of her couch, sniffing at the New Yorker. But Dean's intelligence was every bit as formal and
shining and complete, without the tedious intellectualness. And his "criminality" was not something
that sulked and sneered; it was a wild yea-saying overburst of American joy; it was Western, the
west wind, an ode from the Plains, something new, long prophesied, long a-coming (he only stole
cars for joy rides). Besides, all my New York friends were in the negative, nightmare position of
putting down society and giving their tired bookish or political or psychoanalytical reasons, but
Dean just raced in society, eager for bread and love; he didn't care one way or the other, "so long's I
can get that lil ole gal with that lil sumpin down there tween her legs, boy," and "so long's we can
eat, son, y'ear me? I'm hungry, I'm starving, let's eat right now!"-and off we'd rush to eat, whereof,
as saith Ecclesiastes, "It is your portion under the sun."
A western kinsman of the sun, Dean. Although my aunt warned me that he would get me in trouble,
I could hear a new call and see a new horizon, and believe it at my young age; and a little bit of 
trouble or even Dean's eventual rejection of me as a buddy, putting me down, as he would later, on
starving sidewalks and sickbeds-what did it matter? I was a young writer and I wanted to take off.
Somewhere along the line I knew there'd be girls, visions, everything; somewhere along the line the
pearl would be handed to me.
2
In the month of July 1947, having saved about fifty dollars from old veteran benefits, I was ready to
go to the West Coast. My friend Remi Boncceur had written me a letter from San Francisco, saying
I should come and ship out with him on an around-the-world liner. He swore he could get me into
the engine room. I wrote back and said I'd be satisfied with any old freighter so long as I could take
a few long Pacific trips and come back with enough money to support myself in my aunt's house
while I finished my book. He said he had a shack in Mill City and I would have all the time in the
world to write there while we went through the rigmarole of getting the ship. He was living with a
girl called Lee Ann; he said she was a marvelous cook and everything would jump. Remi was an
old prep-school friend, a Frenchman brought up in Paris and a really mad guy-I didn't know how
mad at this time. So he expected me to arrive in ten days. My aunt was all in accord with my trip to
the West; she said it would do me good, I'd been working so hard all winter and staying in too
much; she even didn't complain when I told her I'd have to hitchhike some. All she wanted was for
me to come back in one piece. So, leaving my big half-manuscript sitting on top of my desk, and
folding back my comfortable home sheets for the last time one morning, I left with my canvas bag
in which a few fundamental things were packed and took off for the Pacific Ocean with the fifty
dollars in my pocket.
I'd been poring over maps of the United States in Paterson for months, even reading books about
the pioneers and savoring names like Platte and Cimarron and so on, and on the road-map was one
long red line called Route 6 that led from the tip of Cape Cod clear to Ely, Nevada, and there
dipped down to Los Angeles. I'll just stay on 6 all the way to Ely, I said to myself and confidently
started. To get to 6 I had to go up to Bear Mountain. Filled with dreams of what I'd do in Chicago,
in Denver, and then finally in San Fran, I took the Seventh Avenue subway to the end of the line at
242nd Street, and there took a trolley into Yonkers; in downtown Yonkers I transferred to an
outgoing trolley and went to the city limits on the east bank of the Hudson River. If you drop a rose
in the Hudson River at its mysterious source in the Adirondacks, think of all the places it journeys
by as it goes out to sea forever-think of that wonderful Hudson Valley. I started hitching up the
thing. Five scattered rides took me to the desired Bear Mountain Fridge, where Route 6 arched in
from New England. It began to rain in torrents when I was let off there. It was mountainous. Route
6 came over the river, wound around a traffic circle, and disappeared into the wilderness. Not only
was there no traffic but the rain came down in buckets and I had no shelter. I had to run under some
pines to take cover; this did no good; I began crying and swearing and socking myself on the head 
for being such a damn fool. I was forty miles north of New York; all the way up I'd been worried
about the fact that on this, my big opening day, I was only moving north instead of the
so-longed-for west. Now I was stuck on my northernmost hangup. I ran a quarter-mile to an
abandoned cute English-style filling station and stood under the dripping eaves. High up over my
head the great hairy Bear Mountain sent down thunderclaps that put the fear of God in me. All I
could see were smoky trees and dismal wilderness rising to the skies. "What the hell am I doing up
here?"
I cursed, I cried for Chicago. "Even now they're all having a big time, they're doing this, I'm not
there, when will I get there!"-and so on. Finally a car stopped at the empty filling station; the man
and the two women in it wanted to study a map. I stepped right up and gestured in the rain; they
consulted; I looked like a maniac, of course, with my hair all wet, my shoes sopping. My shoes,
damn fool that I am, were Mexican huaraches, plantlike sieves not fit for the rainy night of America
and the raw road night. But the people let me in and rode me north to Newburgh, which I accepted
as a better alternative than being trapped in the Bear Mountain wilderness all night. "Besides," said
the man, "there's no traffic passes through 6. If you want to go to Chicago you'd do better going
across the Holland Tunnel in New York and head for Pittsburgh," and I knew he was right. It was
my dream that screwed up, the stupid hearthside idea that it would be wonderful to follow one great
red line across America instead of trying various roads and routes.
In Newburgh it had stopped raining. I walked down to the river, and I had to ride back to New York
in a bus with a delegation of schoolteachers coming back from a weekend in the
mountains-chatter-chatter blah-blah, and me swearing for all the time and the money I'd wasted,
and telling myself, I wanted to go west and here I've been all day and into the night going up and
down, north and south, like something that can't get started. And I swore I'd be in Chicago
tomorrow, and made sure of that, taking a bus to Chicago, spending most of my money, and didn't
give a damn, just as long as I'd be in Chicago tomorrow.
3
It was an ordinary bus trip with crying babies and hot sun, and countryfolk getting on at one Penn
town after another, till we got on the plain of Ohio and really rolled, up by Ashtabula and straight
across Indiana in the night. I arrived in Chi quite early in the morning, got a room in the Y, and
went to bed with a very few dollars in my pocket. I dug Chicago after a good day's sleep.
The wind from Lake Michigan, bop at the Loop, long walks around South Halsted and North Clark,
and one long walk after midnight into the jungles, where a cruising car followed me as a suspicious
character. At this time, 1947, bop was going like mad all over America. The fellows at the Loop
blew, but with a tired air, because bop was somewhere between its Charlie Parker Ornithology
period and another period that began with Miles Davis. And as I sat there listening to that sound of 
the .light which bop has come to represent for all of us, I thought of all my friends from one end of
the country to the other and how they were really all in the same vast backyard doing something so
frantic and rushing-about. And for the first time in my life, the following afternoon, I went into the
West. It was a warm and beautiful day for hitchhiking. To get out of the impossible complexities of
Chicago traffic I took a bus to Joliet, Illinois, went by the Joliet pen, stationed myself just outside
town after a walk through its leafy rickety streets behind, and pointed my way. All the way from
New York to Joliet by bus, and I had spent more than half my money.
My first ride was a dynamite truck with a red flag, about thirty miles into great green Illinois, the
truckdriver pointing out the place where Route 6, which we were on, intersects Route 66 before
they both shoot west for incredible distances. Along about three in the afternoon, after an apple pie
and ice cream in a roadside stand, a woman stopped for me in a little coupe. I had a twinge of hard
joy as I ran after the car. But she was a middle-aged woman, actually the mother of sons my age,
and wanted somebody to help her drive to Iowa. I was all for it. Iowa! Not so far from Denver, and
once I got to Denver I could relax. She drove the first few hours, at one point insisted on visiting an
old church somewhere, as if we were tourists, and then I took over the wheel and, though I'm not
much of a driver, drove clear through the rest of Illinois to Davenport, Iowa, via Rock Island. And
here for the first time in my life I saw my beloved Mississippi River, dry in the summer haze, low
water, with its big rank smell that smells like the raw body of America itself because it washes it up.
Rock Island-railroad tracks, shacks, small downtown section; and over the bridge to Davenport,
same kind of town, all smelling of sawdust in the warm midwest sun. Here the lady had to go on to
her Iowa hometown by another route, and I got out.
The sun was going down. I walked, after a few cold beers, to the edge of town, and it was a long
walk. All the men were driving home from work, wearing railroad hats, baseball hats, all kinds of
hats, just like after work in any town anywhere. One of them gave me a ride up the hill and left me
at a lonely crossroads on the edge of the prairie. It was beautiful there. The only cars that came by
were farmer-cars; they gave me suspicious looks, they clanked along, the cows were coming home.
Not a truck. A few cars zipped by. A hotrod kid came by with his scarf flying. The sun went all the
way down and I was standing in the purple darkness. Now I was scared. There weren't even any
lights in the Iowa countryside; in a minute nobody would be able to see me. Luckily a man going
back to Davenport gave me a lift downtown. But I was right where I started from.
I went to sit in the bus station and think this over. I ate another apple pie and ice cream; that's
practically all I ate all the way across the country, I knew it was nutritious and it was delicious, of
course. I decided to gamble. I took a bus in downtown Davenport, after spending a half-hour
watching a waitress in the bus-station cafe, and rode to the city limits, but this time near the gas
stations. Here the big trucks roared, wham, and inside two minutes one of them cranked to a stop
for me. I ran for it with my soul whoopeeing. And what a driver-a great big tough truckdriver with 
popping eyes and a hoarse raspy voice who just slammed and kicked at everything and got his rig
under way and paid hardly any attention to me. So I could rest my tired soul a little, for one of the
biggest troubles hitchhiking is having to talk to innumerable people, make them feel that they didn't
make a mistake picking you up, even entertain them almost, all of which is a great strain when
you're going all the way and don't plan to sleep in hotels. The guy just yelled above the roar, and all
I had to do was yell back, and we relaxed. And he balled that thing clear to Iowa City and yelled me
the funniest stories about how he got around the law in every town that had an unfair speed limit,
saying over and over again, "Them goddam cops can't put no flies on my ass!" Just as we rolled
into Iowa Qty he saw another truck coming behind us, and because he had to turn off at Iowa City
he blinked his tail lights at the other guy and slowed down for me to jump out, which I did with my
bag, and the other truck, acknowledging this exchange, stopped for me, and once again, in the
twink of nothing, I was in another big high cab, all set to go hundreds of miles across the night, and
was I happy! And the new truckdriver was as crazy as the other and yelled just as much, and all I
had to do was lean back and roll on. Now I could see Denver looming ahead of me like the
Promised Land, way out there beneath the stars, across the prairie of Iowa and the plains of
Nebraska, and I could see the greater vision of San Francisco beyond, like jewels in the night. He
balled the jack and told stories for a couple of hours, then, at a town in Iowa where years later Dean
and I were stopped on suspicion in what looked like a stolen Cadillac, he slept a few hours in the
seat. I slept too, and took one little walk along the lonely brick walls illuminated by one lamp, with
the prairie brooding at the end of each little street and the smell of the corn like dew in the night.
He woke up with a start at dawn. Off we roared, and an hour later the smoke of Des Moines
appeared ahead over the green cornfields. He had to eat his breakfast now and wanted to take it
easy, so I went right on into Des Moines, about four miles, hitching a ride with two boys from the
University of Iowa; and it was strange sitting in their brand-new comfortable car and hearing them
talk of exams as we zoomed smoothly into town. Now I wanted to sleep a whole day. So I went to
the Y to get a room; they didn't have any, and by instinct I wandered down to the railroad
tracks-and there're a lot of them in Des Moines-and wound up in a gloomy old Plains inn of a hotel
by the locomotive roundhouse, and spent a long day sleeping on a big clean hard white bed with
dirty remarks carved in the wall beside my pillow and the beat yellow windowshades pulled over
the smoky scene of the rail-yards. I woke up as the sun was reddening; and that was the one distinct
time in my life, the strangest moment of all, when I didn't know who I was-I was far away from
home, haunted and tired with travel, in a cheap hotel room I'd never seen, hearing the hiss of steam
outside, and the creak of the old wood of the hotel, and footsteps upstairs, and all the sad sounds,
and I looked at the cracked high ceiling and really didn't know who I was for about fifteen strange
seconds. I wasn't scared; I was just somebody else, some stranger, and my whole life was a haunted
life, the life of a ghost. I was halfway across America, at the dividing line between the East of my 
youth and the West of my future, and maybe that's why it happened right there and then, that
strange red afternoon.
But I had to get going and stop moaning, so I picked up my bag, said so long to the old hotelkeeper
sitting by his spittoon, and went to eat. I ate apple pie and ice cream-it was getting better as I got
deeper into Iowa, the pie bigger, the ice cream richer. There were the most beautiful bevies of girls
everywhere I looked in Des Moines that afternoon-they were coming home from high school-but I
had no time now for thoughts like that and promised myself a ball in Denver. Carlo Marx was
already in Denver; Dean was there; Chad King and Tim Gray were there, it was their hometown;
Marylou was there; and there was mention of a mighty gang including Ray Rawlins and his
beautiful blond sister Babe Rawlins; two waitresses Dean knew, the Bettencourt sisters; and even
Roland Major, my old college writing buddy, was there. I looked forward to all of them with joy
and anticipation. So I rushed .past the pretty girls, and the prettiest girls in the world live in Des
Moines.
A guy with a kind of toolshack on wheels, a truck full of tools that he drove standing up like a
modern milkman, gave me a ride up the long hill, where I immediately got a ride from a farmer and
his son heading out for Adel in Iowa. In this town, under a big elm tree near a gas station, I made
the acquaintance of another hitchhiker, a typical New Yorker, an Irishman who'd been driving a
truck for the post office most of his work years and was now headed for a girl in Denver and a new
life. I think he was running away from something in New York, the law most likely. He was a real
red-nose young drunk of thirty and would have bored me ordinarily, except that my senses were
sharp for any kind of human friendship. He wore a beat sweater and baggy pants and had nothing
with him in the way of a bag-just a toothbrush and handkerchiefs. He said we ought to hitch
together. I should have said no, because he looked pretty awful on the road. But we stuck together
and got a ride with a taciturn man to Stuart, Iowa, a town in which we were really stranded. We
stood in front of the railroad-ticket shack in Stuart, waiting for the westbound traffic till the sun
went down, a good five hours, dawdling away the time, at first telling about ourselves, then he told
dirty stories, then we just kicked pebbles and made goofy noises of one kind and another. We got
bored. I decided to spend a buck on beer; we went to an old saloon in Stuart and had a few. There
he got as drunk as he ever did in his Ninth Avenue night back home, and yelled joyously in my ear
all the sordid dreams of his life. I kind of liked him; not because he was a good sort, as he later
proved to be, but because he was enthusiastic about things. We got back on the road in the darkness,
and of course nobody stopped and nobody came by much. That went on till three o'clock in the
morning. We spent some time trying to sleep on the bench at the railroad ticket office, but the
telegraph clicked all night and we couldn't sleep, and big freights were slamming around outside.
We didn't know how to hop a proper chain gang; we'd never done it before; we didn't know whether
they were going east or west or how to find out or what boxcars and flats and de-iced reefers to 
pick, and so on. So when the Omaha bus came through just before dawn we hopped on it and
joined the sleeping passengers-I paid for his fare as well as mine. His name was Eddie. He
reminded me of my cousin-in-law from the Bronx. That was why I stuck with him. It was like
having an old friend along, a smiling good-natured sort to goof along with.
We arrived at Council Bluffs at dawn; I looked out. All winter I'd been reading of the great wagon
parties that held council there before hitting the Oregon and Santa Fe trails; and of course now it
was only cute suburban cottages of one damn kind and another, all laid out in the dismal gray dawn.
Then Omaha, and, by God, the first cowboy I saw, walking along the bleak walls of the wholesale
meat warehouses in a ten-gallon hat and Texas boots, looked like any beat character of the
brickwall dawns of the East except for the getup. We got off the bus and walked clear up the hill,
the long hill formed over the millenniums by the mighty Missouri, alongside of which Omaha is
built, and got out to the country and stuck our thumbs out. We got a brief ride from a wealthy
rancher in a ten-gallon hat, who said the valley of the Platte was as great as the Nile Valley of Egypt,
and as he said so I saw the great trees in the distance that snaked with the riverbed and the great
verdant fields around it, and almost agreed with him. Then as we were standing at another
crossroads and it was starting to get cloudy another cowboy, this one six feet tall in a modest
half-gallon hat, called us over and wanted to know if either one of us could drive. Of course Eddie
could drive, and he had a license and I didn't. Cowboy had two cars with him that he was driving
back to Montana,
His wife was at Grand Island, and he wanted us to drive one of the cars there, where she'd take over.
At that point he was going north, and that would be the limit of our ride with him. But it was a good
hundred miles into Nebraska, and of course ,we jumped for it. Eddie drove alone, the cowboy and
myself following, and no sooner were we out of town than Eddie started to ball that jack ninety
miles an hour out of sheer exuberance. "Damn me, what's that boy doing!" the cowboy shouted,
and took off after him. It began to be like a race. For a minute I thought Eddie was trying to get
away with the car-and for all I know that's what he meant to do. But the cowboy stuck to him and
caught up with him and tooted the horn. Eddie slowed down. The cowboy tooted to stop. "Damn,
boy, you're liable to get a flat going that speed. Can't you drive a little slower?"
"Well, I'll be damned, was I really going ninety?" said Eddie. "I didn't realize it on this smooth
road."
"Just take it a little easy and we'll all get to Grand Island in one piece."
"Sure thing." And we resumed our journey. Eddie had calmed down and probably even got sleepy.
So we drove a hundred miles across Nebraska, following the winding Platte with its verdant fields.
"During the depression," said the cowboy to me, "I used to hop freights at least once a month. In
those days you'd see hundreds of men riding a flatcar or in a boxcar, and they weren't just bums,
they were all kinds of men out of work and going from one place to another and some of them just 
wandering. It was like that all over the West. Brakemen never bothered you in those days. I don't
know about today. Nebraska I ain't got no use for. Why in the middle nineteen thirties this place
wasn't nothing but a big dustcloud as far as the eye could see. You couldn't breathe. The ground was
black. I was here in those days. They can give Nebraska back to the Indians far as I'm concerned. I
hate this damn place more than' any place in the world. Montana's my home now-Missoula. You
come up there sometime and see God's country." Later in the afternoon I slept when he got tired
talking-he was an interesting talker.
We stopped along the road for a bite to eat. The cowboy went off to have a spare tire patched, and
Eddie and I sat down in a kind of homemade diner. I heard a great laugh, the greatest laugh in the
world, and here came this rawhide old-timer Nebraska farmer with a bunch of other boys into the
diner; you could hear his raspy cries clear across the plains, across the whole gray world of them
that day. Everybody else laughed with him. He didn't have a care in the world and had the hugest
regard for everybody. I said to myself, Wham, listen to that man laugh. That's the West, here I am in
the West. He came booming into the diner, calling Maw's name, and she made the sweetest cherry
pie in Nebraska, and I had some with a mountainous scoop of ice cream on top. "Maw, rustle me up
some grub afore I have to start eatin myself raw or some damn silly idee like that." And he threw
himself on a stool and went hyaw hyaw hyaw hyaw. "And thow some beans in it." It was the spirit
of the West sitting right next to me. I wished I knew his whole raw life and what the hell he'd been
doing all these years besides laughing and yelling like that. Whooee, I told my soul, and the
cowboy came back and off we went to Grand Island.
We got there in no time flat. He went to fetch his wife and off to whatever fate awaited him, and
Eddie and I resumed on the road. We got a ride from a couple of young fellows- wranglers,
teenagers, country boys in a put-together jalopy- and were left off somewhere up the line in a thin
drizzle of rain. Then an old man who said nothing-and God knows why he picked us up-took us to
Shelton. Here Eddie stood forlornly in the road in front of a staring bunch of short, squat Omaha
Indians who had nowhere to go and nothing to do. Across the road was the railroad track and the
watertank saying SHELTON. "Damn me," said Eddie with amazement, "I've been in this town
before. It was years ago, during the war, at night, late at night when everybody was sleeping. I went
out on the platform to smoke, and there we was in the middle of nowhere and black as hell, and I
look up and see that name Shelton written on the watertank. Bound for the Pacific, everybody
snoring, every damn dumb sucker, and we only stayed a few minutes, stoking up or something, and
off we went. Damn me, this Shelton! I hated this place ever since!" And we were stuck in Shelton.
As in Davenport, Iowa, somehow all the cars were farmer-cars, and once in a while a tourist car,
which is worse, with old men driving and their wives pointing out the sights or poring over maps,
and sitting back looking at everything with suspicious faces.
The drizzle increased and Eddie got cold; he had very little clothing. I fished a wool plaid shirt 
from my canvas bag and he put it on. He felt a little better. I had a cold. I bought cough drops in a
rickety Indian store of some kind. I went to the little two-by-four post office and wrote my aunt a
penny postcard. We went back to the gray road. There she was in front of us, Shelton, written on
the watertank. The Rock Island balled by. We saw the faces of Pullman passengers go by in a blur.
The train howled off across the plains in the direction of our desires. It started to rain harder.
A tall, lanky fellow in a gallon hat stopped his car on the wrong side of the road and came over to
us; he looked like a sheriff. We prepared our stories secretly. He took his time coming over. "You
boys going to get somewhere, or just going?" We didn't understand his question, and it was a
damned good question.
"Why?" we said.
"Well, I own a little carnival that's pitched a few mile down the road and I'm looking for some old
boys willing to work and make a buck for themselves. I've got a roulette concession and a
wooden-ring concession, you know, the kind you throw around dolls and take your luck. You boys
want to work for me, you can get thirty per cent of the take."
"Room and board?"
"You can get a bed but no food. You'll have to eat in town. We travel some." We thought it over.
"It's a good opportunity," he said, and waited patiently for us to make up our minds. We felt silly
and didn't know what to say, and I for one didn't want to get hung-up with a carnival. I was in such
a bloody hurry to get to the gang in Denver.
I said, "I don't know, I'm going as fast as I can and I don't think I have the time." Eddie said the
same thing, and the old man waved his hand and casually sauntered back to his car and drove off.
And that was that. We laughed about it awhile and speculated about what it would have been like. I
had visions of a dark and dusty night on the plains, and the faces of Nebraska families wandering
by, with their rosy children looking at everything with awe, and I know I would have felt like the
devil himself rooking them with all those cheap carnival tricks. And the Ferris wheel revolving in
the flatlands darkness, and, God almighty, the sad music of the merry-go-round and me wanting to
get on to my goal-and sleeping in some gilt wagon on a bed of burlap.
Eddie turned out to be a pretty absent-minded pal of the road. A funny old contraption rolled by,
driven by an old man; it was made of some kind of aluminum, square as a box -a trailer, no doubt,
but a weird, crazy Nebraska homemade trailer. He was going very slow and stopped. We rushed up;
he said he could only take one; without a word Eddie jumped in and slowly rattled from my sight,
and wearing my wool plaid shirt. Well, alackaday, I kissed the shirt good-by; it had only
sentimental value in any case. I waited in our personal godawful Shelton for a long, long time,
several hours, and I kept thinking it was getting night; actually it was only early afternoon, but dark.
Denver, Denver, how would I ever get to Denver? I was just about giving up and planning to sit
over coffee when a fairly new car stopped, driven by a young guy. I ran like mad. 
"Where you going?"
"Denver."
"Well, I can take you a hundred miles up the line."
"Grand, grand, you saved my life."
"I used to hitchhike myself, that's why I always pick up a fellow."
 "I would too if I had a car." And so we talked, and he told me about his life, which wasn't very
interesting, and I started to sleep some and woke up right outside the town of Gothenburg, where he
let me off.
4
The greatest ride in my life was about to come up, a truck, with a flatboard at the back, with about
six or seven boys sprawled out on it, and the drivers, two young blond farmers from Minnesota,
were picking up every single soul they found on that road-the most smiling, cheerful couple of
handsome bumpkins you could ever wish to see, both wearing cotton shirts and overalls, nothing
else; both thick-wristed and earnest, with broad howareyou smiles for anybody and anything that
came across their path. I ran up, said "Is there room?" They said, "Sure, hop on, 'sroom for
everybody."
I wasn't on the flatboard before the truck roared off; I lurched, a rider grabbed me, and I sat down.
Somebody passed a bottle of rotgut, the bottom of it. I took a big swig in the wild, lyrical, drizzling
air of Nebraska. "Whooee, here we go!" yelled a kid in a baseball cap, and they gunned up the truck
to seventy and passed everybody on the road. "We been riding this sonofabitch since Des Moines.
These guys never stop. Every now and then you have to yell for pisscall, otherwise you have to piss
off the air, and hang on, brother, hang on."
I looked at the company. There were two young farmer boys from North Dakota in red baseball
caps, which is the standard North Dakota farmer-boy hat, and they were headed for the harvests;
their old men had given them leave to hit the road for a summer. There were two young city boys
from Columbus, Ohio, high-school football players, chewing gum, winking, singing in the breeze,
and they said they were hitchhiking around the United States for the summer. "We're going to LA!
"they yelled.
"What are you going to do there?"
"Hell, we don't know. Who cares?"
Then there was a tall slim fellow who had a sneaky look. "Where you from?" I asked. I was lying
next to him on the platform; you couldn't sit without bouncing off, it had no rails. And he turned
slowly to me, opened his mouth, and said, "Mon-ta-na."
Finally there were Mississippi Gene and his charge. Mississippi Gene was a little dark guy who
rode freight trains around the country, a thirty-year-old hobo but with a youthful look so you 
couldn't tell exactly what age he was. And he sat on the boards crosslegged, looking out over the
fields without saying anything for hundreds of miles, and finally at one point he turned to me and
said, "Where you headed?"
I said Denver.
"I got a sister there but I ain't seed her for several couple years." His language was melodious and
slow. He was patient. His charge was a sixteen-year-old tall blond kid, also in hobo rags; that is to
say, they wore old clothes that had been turned black by the soot of railroads and the dirt of boxcars
and sleeping on the ground. The blond kid was also quiet and he seemed to be running away from
something, and it figured to be the law the way he looked straight ahead and wet his lips in worried
thought. Montana Slim spoke to them occasionally with a sardonic and insinuating smile. They
paid no attention to him. Slim was all insinuation. I was afraid of his long goofy grin that he opened
up straight in your face and held there half-moronically.
"You got any money?" he said to me.
"Hell no, maybe enough for a pint of whisky till I get to Denver. What about you?"
"I know where I can get some."
"Where?"
 "Anywhere. You can always folly a man down an alley, can't you?"
"Yeah, I guess you can."
"I ain't beyond doing it when I really need some dough. Headed up to Montana to see my father. I'll
have to get off this rig at Cheyenne and move up some other way. These crazy boys are going to
Los Angeles."
"Straight?"
"All the way-if you want to go to LA you got a ride."
I mulled this over; the thought of zooming all night across Nebraska, Wyoming, and the Utah desert
in the morning, and then most likely the Nevada desert in the afternoon, and actually arriving in
Los Angeles within a foreseeable space of time almost made me change my plans. But I had to go
to Denver. I'd have to get off at Cheyenne too, and hitch south ninety miles to Denver.
I was glad when the two Minnesota farmboys who owned the truck decided to stop in North Platte
and eat; I wanted to have a look at them. They came out of the cab and smiled at all of us.
"Pisscall!" said one. "Time to eat!" said the other. But they were the only ones in the party who had
money to buy food. We all shambled after them to a restaurant run by a bunch of women, and sat
around over hamburgers and coffee while they wrapped away enormous meals just as if they were
back in their mother's kitchen. They were brothers; they were transporting farm machinery from
Los Angeles to Minnesota and making good money at it. So on their trip to the Coast empty they
picked up everybody on the road. They'd done this about five times now; they were having a hell of
a time. They liked everything. They never stopped smiling. I tried to talk to them-a kind of dumb 
attempt on my part to befriend the captains of our ship-and the only responses I got were two sunny
smiles and large white corn-fed teeth.
Everybody had joined them in the restaurant except the two hobo kids, Gene and his boy. When we
all got back they were still sitting in the truck, forlorn and disconsolate. Now the darkness was
falling. The drivers had a smoke; I jumped at the chance to go buy a bottle of whisky to keep warm
in the rushing cold air of night. They smiled when I told them. "Go ahead, hurry up."
"You can have a couple shots!" I reassured them.
"Oh no, we never drink, go ahead."
Montana Slim and the two high-school boys wandered the streets of North Platte with me till I
found a whisky store. They chipped in some, and Slim some, and I bought a fifth. Tall, sullen men
watched us go by from false-front buildings; the main street was lined with square box-houses.
There were immense vistas of the plains beyond every sad street. I felt something different in the
air in North Platte, I didn't know what it was. In five minutes I did. We got back on the truck and
roared off. It got dark quickly. We all had a shot, and suddenly I looked, and the verdant farmfields
of the Platte began to disappear and in their stead, so far you couldn't see to the end, appeared long
flat wastelands of sand and sagebrush. I was astounded.
"What in the hell is this?" I cried out to Slim.
"This is the beginning of the rangelands, boy. Hand me another drink."
"Whoopee!" yelled the high-school boys. "Columbus, so long! What would Sparkie and the boys
say if they was here. Yow!"
The drivers had switched up front; the fresh brother was gunning the truck to the limit. The road
changed too: humpy in the middle, with soft shoulders and a ditch on both sides about four feet
deep, so that the truck bounced and teetered from one side of the road to the other-miraculously
only when there were no cars coming the opposite way-and I thought we'd all take a somersault.
But they were tremendous drivers. How that truck disposed of the Nebraska nub-the nub that sticks
out over Colorado! And soon I realized I was actually at last over Colorado, though not officially in
it, but looking southwest toward Denver itself a few hundred miles away. I yelled for joy. We
passed the bottle. The great blazing stars came out, the far-receding sand hills got dim. I felt like an
arrow that could shoot out all the way.
And suddenly Mississippi Gene turned to me from his crossiegged, patient reverie, and opened his
mouth, and leaned close, and said, "These plains put me in the mind of Texas."
"Are you from Texas?"
"No sir, I'm from Green-veil Muzz-sippy." And that was the way he said it.
"Where's that kid from?"
"He got into some kind of trouble back in Mississippi, so I offered to help him out. Boy's never
been out on his own. I take care of him best as I can, he's only a child." Although Gene was white 
there was something of the wise and tired old Negro in him, and something very much like Elmer
Hassel, the New York dope addict, in him, but a railroad Hassel, a traveling epic Hassel, crossing
and recrossing the country every year, south in the winter and north in the summer, and only
because he had no place he could stay in without getting tired of it and because there was nowhere
to go but everywhere, keep rolling under the stars, generally the Western stars.
"I been to Ogden a couple times. If you want to ride on to Ogden I got some friends there we could
hole up with."
"I'm going to Denver from Cheyenne."
"Hell, go right straight thu, you don't get a ride like this every day."
This too was a tempting offer. What was in Ogden? "What's Ogden?" I said.
"It's the place where most of the boys pass thu and always meet there; you're liable to see anybody
there."
In my earlier days I'd been to sea with a tall rawboned fellow from Louisiana called Big Slim
Hazard, William Holmes Hazard, who was hobo by choice. As a little boy he'd seen a hobo come
up to ask his mother for a piece of pie, and she had given it to him, and when the hobo went off
down the road the little boy had said, "Ma, what is that fellow?" "Why. that's a ho-bo." "Ma, I want
to be a ho-bo someday." "Shet your mouth, that's not for the like of the Hazards." But he never
forgot that day, and when he grew up, after a short spell playing football at LSU, he did become a
hobo. Big Slim and I spent many nights telling stories and spitting tobacco juice in paper containers.
There was something so indubitably reminiscent of Big Slim Hazard in Mississippi Gene's
demeanor that I said, "Do you happen to have met a fellow called Big Slim Hazard somewhere?"
And he said, "You mean the tall fellow with the big laugh?"
"Well, that sounds like him. He came from Ruston, Louisiana."
"That's right. Louisiana Slim he's sometimes called. Yes-sir, I shore have met Big Slim."
"And he used to work in the East Texas oil fields?"
"East Texas is right. And now he's punching cows."
And that was exactly right; and still I couldn't believe Gene could have really known Slim, whom
I'd been looking for, more or less, for years. "And he used to work in tugboats in New York?"
"Well now, I don't know about that."
"I guess you only knew him in the West."
"I reckon. I ain't never been to New York."
"Well, damn me, I'm amazed you know him. This is a big country. Yet I knew you must have
known him."
"Yessir, I know Big Slim pretty well. Always generous with his money when he's got some. Mean,
tough fellow, too; I seen him flatten a policeman in the yards at Cheyenne, one punch." That
sounded like Big Slim; he was always practicing that one punch in the air; he looked like Jack 
Dempsey, but a young Jack Dempsey who drank.
"Damn!" I yelled into the wind, and I had another shot, and by now I was feeling pretty good.
Every shot was wiped away by the rushing wind of the open truck, wiped away of its bad effects,
and the good effect sank in my stomach. "Cheyenne, here I come!" I sang. "Denver, look out for
your boy."
Montana Slim turned to me, pointed at my shoes, and commented, "You reckon if you put them
things in the ground something'll grow up?"-without cracking a smile, of course, and the other boys
heard him and laughed. And they were the silliest shoes in America; I brought them along
specifically because I didn't want my feet to sweat in the hot road, and except for the rain in Bear
Mountain they proved to be the best possible shoes for my journey. So I laughed with them. And
the shoes were pretty ragged by now, the bits of colored leather sticking up like pieces of a fresh
pineapple and my toes showing through. Well, we had another shot and laughed. As in a dream we
zoomed through small crossroads towns smack out of the darkness, and passed long lines of
lounging harvest hands and cowboys in the night. They watched us pass in one motion of the head,
and we saw them slap their thighs from the continuing dark the other side of town-we were a
funny-looking crew.
A lot of men were in this country at that time of the year; it was harvest time. The Dakota boys
were fidgeting. "I think we'll get off at the next pisscall; seems like there's a lot of work around
here."
"All you got to do is move north when it's over here," counseled Montana Slim, "and jes follow the
harvest till you get to Canada." The boys nodded vaguely; they didn't take much stock in his advice.
Meanwhile the blond young fugitive sat the same way; every now and then Gene leaned out of his
Buddhistic trance over the rushing dark plains and said something tenderly in the boy's ear. The boy
nodded. Gene was taking care of him, of his moods and his fears. I wondered where the hell they
would go and what they would do. They had no cigarettes. I squandered my pack on them, I loved
them so. They were grateful and gracious. They never asked, I kept offering. Montana Slim had his
own but never passed the pack. We zoomed through another crossroads town, passed another line
of tall lanky men in jeans clustered in the dim light like moths on the desert, and returned to the
tremendous darkness, and the stars overhead were pure and bright because of the increasingly thin
air as we mounted the high hill of the western plateau, about a foot a mile, so they say, and no trees
obstructing any low-leveled stars anywhere. And once I saw a moody whitefaced cow in the sage
by the road as we flitted by. It was like riding a railroad train, just as steady and just as straight.
By and by we came to a town, slowed down, and Montana Slim said, "Ah, pisscall," but the
Minnesotans didn't stop and went right on through. "Damn, I gotta go," said Slim.
"Go over the side," said somebody.
"Well, I will" he said, and slowly, as we all watched, he inched to the back of the platform on his 
haunch, holding on as best he could, till his legs dangled over. Somebody knocked on the window
of the cab to bring this to the attention of the brothers. Their great smiles broke as they turned. And
just as Slim was ready to proceed, precarious as it was already, they began zigzagging the truck at
seventy miles an hour. He fell back a moment; we saw a whale's spout in the air; he struggled back
to a sitting position. They swung the truck. Wham, over he went on his side, watering all over
himself. In the roar we could hear him faintly cursing, like the whine of a man far across the hills.
"Damn . . . damn . . ." He never knew we were doing this deliberately; he just struggled, as grim as
Job. When he was finished, as such, he was wringing wet, and now he had to edge and shimmy his
way back, and with a most woebegone look, and everybody laughing, except the sad blond boy, and
the Minnesotans roaring in the cab. I handed him the bottle to make up for it.
"What the hail," he said, "was they doing that on purpose?"
"They sure were."
"Well, damn me, I didn't know that. I know I tried it back in Nebraska and didn't have half so much
trouble."
We came suddenly into the town of Ogallala, and here the fellows in the cab called out, "Pisscall!"
and with great good delight. Slim stood sullenly by the truck, ruing a lost opportunity. The two
Dakota boys said good-by to everybody and figured they'd start harvesting here. We watched them
disappear in the night toward the shacks at the end of town where lights were burning, where a
watcher of the night in jeans said the employment men would be. I had to buy more cigarettes.
Gene and the blond boy followed me to stretch their legs. I walked into the least likely place in the
world, a kind of lonely Plains soda fountain for the local teenage girls and boys. They were dancing,
a few of them, to the music on the jukebox. There was a lull when we came in. Gene and Blondey
just stood there, looking at nobody; all they wanted was cigarettes. There were some pretty girls,
too. And one of them made eyes at Blondey and he never saw it, and if he had he wouldn't have
cared, he was so sad and gone.
I bought a pack each for them; they thanked me. The truck was ready to go. It was getting on
midnight now, and cold. Gene, who'd been around the country more times than he could count on
his fingers and toes, said the best thing to do now was for all of us to bundle up under the big
tarpaulin or we'd freeze. In this manner, and with the rest of the bottle, we kept warm as the air
grew ice-cold and pinged our ears. The stars seemed to get brighter the more we climbed the High
Plains. We were in Wyoming now. Flat on my back, I stared straight up at the magnificent
firmament, glorying in the time I was making, in how far I had come from sad Bear Mountain after
all, and tingling with kicks at the thought of what lay ahead of me in Denver-whatever, whatever it
would be. And Mississippi Gene began to sing a song. He sang it in a melodious, quiet voice, with
a river accent, and it was simple, just "I got a purty little girl, she's sweet six-teen, she's the purti-est
thing you ever seen," repeating it with other lines thrown in, all concerning how far he'd been and 
how he wished he could go back to her but he done lost her.
I said, "Gene, that's the prettiest song."
"It's the sweetest I know," he said with a smile.
"I hope you get where you're going, and be happy when you do."
"I always make out and move along one way or the other.",
Montana Slim was asleep. He woke up and said to me,' "Hey, Blackie, how about you and me
investigatin' Cheyenne  together tonight before you go to Denver?"
"Sure thing." I was drunk enough to go for anything.
As the truck reached the outskirts of Cheyenne, we saw the high red lights of the local radio station,
and suddenly we were bucking through a great crowd of people that poured along both sidewalks.
"Hell's bells, it's Wild West Week," said Slim. Big crowds of businessmen, fat businessmen in boots
and ten-gallon hats, with their hefty wives in cowgirl attire, bustled and whoopeed on the wooden
sidewalks of old Cheyenne; farther down were the long stringy boulevard lights of new downtown
Cheyenne, but the celebration was focusing on Oldtown. Blank guns went off. The saloons were
crowded to the sidewalk. I was amazed, and at the same time I felt it was ridiculous: in my first
shot at the West I was seeing to what absurd devices it had fallen to keep its proud tradition. We had
to jump off the truck and say good-by; the Minnesotans weren't interested in hanging around. It was
sad to see them go, and I realized that I would never see any of them again, but that's the way it was.
"You'll freeze your ass tonight," I warned. "Then you'll burn 'em in the desert tomorrow afternoon."
"That's all right with me long's as we get out of this cold night," said Gene. And the truck left,
threading its way through the crowds, and nobody paying attention to the strangeness of the kids
inside the tarpaulin, staring at the town like babes from a coverlet. I watched it disappear into the
night.
5
I was with Montana Slim and we started hitting the bars. I had about seven dollars, five of which I
foolishly squandered that night. First we milled with all the cowboy-dudded tourists and oilmen
and ranchers, at bars, in doorways, on the sidewalk; then for a while I shook Slim, who was
wandering a little slaphappy in the street from all the whisky and beer: he was that kind of drinker;
his eyes got glazed, and in a minute he'd be telling an absolute stranger about things. I went into a
chili joint and the waitress was Mexican and beautiful. I ate, and then I wrote her a little love note
on the back of the bill. The chili joint was deserted; everybody was somewhere else, drinking. I told
her to turn the bill over. She read it and laughed. It was a little poem about how I wanted her to
come and see the night with me.
"I'd love to, Chiquito, but I have a date with my boy friend."
"Can't you shake him?" 
"No, no, I don't," she said sadly, and I loved the way she said it.
"Some other time I'll come by here," I said, and she said, "Any time, kid." Still I hung around, just
to look at her, and had another cup of coffee. Her boy friend came in sullenly and wanted to know
when she was off. She bustled around to close the place quick. I had to get out. I gave her a smile
when I left. Things were going on as wild as ever outside, except that the fat burpers were getting
drunker and whooping up louder. It was funny. There were Indian chiefs wandering around in big
headdresses and really solemn among the flushed drunken faces. I saw Slim tottering along and
joined him.
He said, "I just wrote a postcard to my Paw in Montana. You reckon you can find a mailbox and put
it in?" It was a strange request; he gave me the postcard and tottered through the swinging doors of
a saloon. I took the card, went to the box, and took a quick look at it. "Dear Paw, I'll be home
Wednesday. Everything's all right with me and I hope the same is with you. Richard." It gave me a
different idea of him; how tenderly polite he was with his father. I went in the bar and joined him.
We picked up two girls, a pretty young blonde and a fat brunette. They were dumb and sullen, but
we wanted to make them. We took them to a rickety nightclub that was already closing, and there I
spent all but two dollars on Scotches for them and beer for us. I was getting drunk and didn't care;
everything was fine. My whole being and purpose was pointed at the little blonde. I wanted to go in
there with all my strength. I hugged her and wanted to tell her. The nightclub closed and we all
wandered out in the rickety dusty streets. I looked up at the sky; the pure, wonderful stars were still
there, burning. The girls wanted to go to the bus station, so we all went, but they apparently wanted
to meet some sailor who was there waiting for them, a cousin of the fat girl's, and the sailor had
friends with him. I said to the blonde, "What's up?" She said she wanted to go home, in Colorado
just over the line south of Cheyenne. "I'll take you in a bus," I said.
"No, the bus stops on the highway and I have to walk across that damn prairie all by myself. I
spend all afternoon looking at the damn thing and I don't aim to walk over it tonight."
"Ah, listen, we'll take a nice walk in the prairie flowers."
"There ain't no flowers there," she said. "I want to go to New York. I'm sick and tired of this. Ain't
no place to go but Cheyenne and ain't nothin in Cheyenne."
"Ain't nothin in New York."
"Hell there ain't," she said with a curl of her lips.
The bus station 'was crowded to the doors. All kinds of people were waiting for buses or just
standing around; there were a lot of Indians, who watched everything with their stony eyes. The girl
disengaged herself from my talk and joined the sailor and the others. Slim was dozing on a bench. I
sat down. The floors of bus stations are the same all over the country, always covered with butts
and spit and they give a feeling of sadness that only bus stations have. For a moment it was no
different from being in Newark, except for the great hugeness outside that I loved so much. I rued 
the way I had broken up the purity of my entire trip, not saving every dime, and dawdling and not
really making time, fooling around with this sullen girl and spending all my money. It made me
sick. I hadn't slept in so long I got too tired to curse and fuss and went off to sleep; I curled up on
the seat with my canvas bag for a pillow, and slept till eight o'clock in the morning among the
dreamy murmurs and noises of the station and of hundreds of people passing.
I woke up with a big headache. Slim was gone-to Montana, I guess. I went outside. And there in the
blue air I saw for the first time, far off, the great snowy tops of the Rocky Mountains. I took a deep
breath. I had to get to Denver at once. First I ate a breakfast, a modest one of toast and coffee and
one egg, and then I cut out of town to the highway. The Wild West festival was still going on; there
was a rodeo, and the whooping and jumping were about to start all over again. I left it behind me. I
wanted to see my gang in Denver. I crossed a railroad overpass and reached a bunch of shacks
where two highways forked off, both for Denver. I took the one nearest the mountains so I could
look at them, and pointed myself that way. I got a ride right off from a young fellow from
Connecticut who was driving around the country in his jalopy, painting; he was the son of an editor
in the East. He talked and talked; I was sick from drinking and from the altitude. At one point I
almost had to stick my head out the window. But by the time he let me off at Longmont, Colorado,
I was feeling normal again and had even started telling him about the state of my own travels. He
wished me luck.
It was beautiful in Longmont. Under a tremendous old tree was a bed of green lawn-grass
belonging to a gas station. I asked the attendant if I could sleep there, and he said sure; so I
stretched out a wool shirt, laid my face flat on it, with an elbow out, and with one eye cocked at the
snowy Rockies in the hot sun for just a moment. I fell asleep for two delicious hours, the only
discomfort being an occasional Colorado ant. And here I am in Colorado! I kept thinking gleefully.
Damn! damn! damn! I'm making it! And after a refreshing sleep filled with cobwebby dreams of
my past life in the East I got up, washed in the station men's room, and strode off, fit and slick as a
fiddle, and got me a rich thick milkshake at the road-house to put some freeze in my hot, tormented
stomach.
Incidentally, a very beautiful Colorado gal shook me that cream; she was all smiles too; I was
grateful, it made up for last night. I said to myself, Wow! What'll Denver be like! I got on that hot
road, and off I went in a brand-new car driven by a Denver businessman of about thirty-five. He
went seventy. I tingled all over; I counted minutes and subtracted miles. Just ahead, over the rolling
wheatfields all golden beneath the distant snows of Estes, I'd be seeing old Denver at last. I pictured
myself in a Denver bar that night, with all the gang, and in their eyes I would be strange and ragged
and like the Prophet who has walked across the land to bring the dark Word, and the only Word I
had was "Wow!" The man and I had a long, warm conversation about our respective schemes in life,
and before I knew it we were going over the wholesale fruitmarkets outside Denver; there were 
smokestacks, smoke, railyards, red-brick buildings, and the distant downtown gray-stone buildings,
and here I was in Denver. He let me off at Larimer Street. I stumbled along with the most wicked
grin of joy in the world, among the old bums and beat cowboys of Larimer Street.
6
In those days I didn't know Dean as well as I do now, and the first thing I wanted to do was look up
Chad King, which I did. I called up his house, talked to his mother -she said, "Why, Sal, what are
you doing in Denver?" Chad is a slim blond boy with a strange witch-doctor face that goes' with his
interest in anthropology and prehistory Indians. Hi;, nose beaks softly and almost creamily under a
golden flare or' hair; he has the beauty and grace of a Western hotshot who':, danced in roadhouses
and played a little football. A quavering twang comes out when he speaks. "The thing I always
liked, Sal, about the Plains Indians was the way they always got s'danged embarrassed after they
boasted the number of scalps they got. In Ruxton's Life in the Far West there's an Indian who gets
red all over blushing because he got so many scalps and he runs like hell into the plains to glory
over his deeds in hiding. Damn, that tickled me!"
Chad's mother located him, in the drowsy Denver afternoon, working over his Indian
basket-making at the local museum. I called him there; he came and picked me up in his old Ford
coupe that he used to take trips in the mountains, to dig for Indian objects. He came into the bus
station wearing jeans and a big smile. I was sitting on my bag on the floor talking to the very same
sailor who'd been in the Cheyenne bus station with me, asking him what happened to the blonde.
He was so bored he didn't answer. Chad and I got in his little coupe and the first thing he had to do
was get maps at the State building. Then he had to see an old schoolteacher, and so on, and all I
wanted to do was drink beer. And in the back of my mind was the wild thought, Where is Dean and
what is he doing right now? Chad had decided not to be Dean's friend any more, for some odd
reason, and he didn't even know where he lived.
"Is Carlo Marx in town?"
"Yes." But he wasn't talking to him any more either. This was the beginning of Chad King's
withdrawal from our general gang. I was to take a nap in his house that afternoon. The word was
that Tim Gray had an apartment waiting for me up Coif ax Avenue, that Roland Major was already
living in it and was waiting for me to join him. I sensed some kind of conspiracy in the air, and this
conspiracy lined up two groups in the gang: it was Chad King and Tim Gray and Roland Major,
together with the Rawlinses, generally agreeing to ignore Dean Moriarty and Carlo Marx. I was
smack in the middle of this interesting war.
It was a war with social overtones. Dean was the son of a wino, one of the most tottering bums of
Larimer Street, and Dean had in fact been brought up generally on Larimer Street and thereabouts.
He used to plead in court at the age of six to have his father set free. He used to beg in front of 
Larimer alleys and sneak the money back to his father, who waited among the broken bottles with
an old buddy. Then when Dean grew up he began hanging around the Glenarm pool-halls; he set a
Denver record for stealing cars and went to the reformatory. From the age of eleven to seventeen he
was usually in reform school. His specialty was stealing cars, gunning for girls coming out of high
school in the afternoon, driving them out to the mountains, making them, and coming back to sleep
in any available hotel bathtub in town. His father, once a respectable and hardworking tinsmith, had
become a wine alcoholic, which is worse than a whisky alcoholic, and was reduced to riding
freights to Texas in the winter and back to Denver in the summer. Dean had brothers on his dead
mother's side-she died when he was small-but they disliked him. Dean's only buddies were the
poolhall boys. Dean, who had the tremendous energy of a new kind of American saint, and Carlo
were the underground monsters of that season in Denver, together with the poolhall gang, and,
symbolizing this most beautifully, Carlo had a basement apartment on Grant Street and we all met
there many a night that went to dawn-Carlo, Dean, myself, Tom Snark, Ed Dunkel, and Roy
Johnson. More of these others later.
My first afternoon in Denver I slept in Chad King's room while his mother went on with her
housework downstairs and Chad worked at the library. It was a hot high-plains afternoon in July. I
would not have slept if it hadn't been for Chad King's father's invention. Chad King's father, a fine
kind man, was in his seventies, old and feeble, thin and drawn-out, and telling stories with a slow,
slow relish; good stories, too, about his boyhood on the North Dakota plains in the eighties, when
for diversion he rode ponies bareback and chased after coyotes with a club. Later he became a
country schoolteacher in the Oklahoma panhandle, and finally a businessman of many devices in
Denver. He still had his old office over a garage down the street-the rolltop desk was still there,
together with countless dusty papers of past excitement and moneymaking. He had invented a
special air-conditioner. He put an ordinary fan in a window frame and somehow conducted cool
water through coils in front of the whirring blades. The result was perfect-within four feet of the fan
-and then the water apparently turned into steam in the hot day and the downstairs part of the
house was just as hot as usual. But I was sleeping right under the fan on Chad's bed, with a big bust
of Goethe staring at me, and I comfortably went to sleep, only to wake up in twenty minutes
freezing to death. I put a blanket on and still I was cold. Finally it was so cold I couldn't sleep, and I
went downstairs. The old man asked me how his invention worked. I said it worked damned good,
and I meant it within bounds. I liked the man. He was lean with memories. "I once made a spot
remover that has since been copied by big firms in the East. I've been trying to collect on that for
some years now. If I only had enough money to raise a decent lawyer . . ." But it was too late to
raise a decent lawyer; and he sat in his house dejectedly. In the evening we had a wonderful dinner
his mother cooked, venison steak that Chad's uncle had shot in the mountains. But where was
Dean? 
7
The following ten days were, as W. C. Fields said, "fraught with eminent peril"-and mad. I moved
in with Roland Major in the really swank apartment that belonged to Tim Gray's folks. We each had
a bedroom, and there was a kitchenette with food in the icebox, and a huge living room where
Major sat in his silk dressing gown composing his latest Hemingwayan short story-a choleric,
red-faced, pudgy hater of everything, who could turn on the warmest and most charming smile in
the world when real life confronted him sweetly in the night. He sat like that at his desk, and I
jumped around over the thick soft rug, wearing only my chino pants. He'd just written a story about
a guy who comes to Denver for the first time. His name is Phil. His traveling companion is a
mysterious and quiet fellow called Sam. Phil goes out to dig Denver and gets hung-up with arty
types. He comes back to the hotel room. Lugubriously he says, "Sam, they're here too." And Sam is
just looking out the window sadly. "Yes," says Sam, "I know." And the point was that Sam didn't
have to go and look to know this. The arty types were all over America, sucking up its blood. Major
and I were great pals; he thought I was the farthest thing from an arty type. Major liked good wines,
just like Hemingway. He reminisced about his recent trip to France. "Ah, Sal, if you could sit with
me high in the Basque country with a cool bottle of Poignon Dix-neuf, then you'd know there are
other things besides boxcars."
"I know that. It's just that I love boxcars and I love to read the names on them like Missouri Pacific,
Great Northern, Rock Island Line. By Gad, Major, if I could tell you everything that happened to
me hitching here."
The Rawlinses lived a few blocks away. This was a delightful family-a youngish mother, part
owner of a decrepit, ghost-town hotel, with five sons and two daughters. The wild son was Ray
Rawlins, Tim Gray's boyhood buddy. Ray came roaring in to get me and we took to each other right
away. We went off and drank in the Colfax bars. One of Ray's sisters was a beautiful blonde called
Babe-a tennis-playing, surf-riding doll of the West. She was Tim Gray's girl. And Major, who was
only passing through Denver and doing so in real style in the apartment, was going out with Tim
Gray's sister Betty. I was the only guy without a girl. I asked everybody, "Where's Dean?" They
made smiling negative answers.
Then finally it happened. The phone rang, and it was Carlo Marx. He gave me the address of his
basement apartment. I said, "What are you doing in Denver? I mean what are you doing? What's
going on?"
"Oh, wait till I tell you."
I rushed over to meet him. He was working in May's department store nights; crazy Ray Rawlins
called him up there from a bar, getting janitors to run after Carlo with a story that somebody had
died. Carlo immediately thought it was me who had died. And Rawlins said over the phone, "Sal's 
in Denver," and gave him my address and phone.
"And where is Dean?"
"Dean is in Denver. Let me tell you." And he told me that Dean was making love to two girls at the
same time, they being Marylou, his first wife, who waited for him in a hotel room, and Camille, a
new girl, who waited for him in a hotel room. "Between the two of them he rushes to me for our
own unfinished business."
"And what business is that??"
"Dean and I are embarked on a tremendous season together. We're trying to communicate with
absolute honesty and absolute completeness everything on our minds. We've had to take benzedrine.
We sit on the bed, crosslegged, facing each other. I have finally taught Dean that he can do anything
he wants, become mayor of Denver, marry a millionairess, or become the greatest poet since
Rimbaud. But he keeps rushing out to see the midget auto races. I go with him. He jumps and yells,
excited. You know, Sal, Dean is really hung-up on things like that." Marx said "Hrnm" in his soul
and thought about this.
"What's the schedule?" I said. There was always a schedule in Dean's life.
"The schedule is this: I came off work a half-hour ago. In that time Dean is balling Marylou at the
hotel and gives me time to change and dress. At one sharp he rushes from Marylou to Camille-of
course neither one of them knows what's going on-and bangs her once, giving me time to arrive at
one-thirty. Then he comes out with me-first he has to beg with Camille, who's already started hating
me-and we come here to talk till six in the morning. We usually spend more time than that, but it's
getting awfully complicated and he's pressed for time. Then at six he goes back to Marylou-and he's
going to spend all day tomorrow running around to get the necessary papers for their divorce.
Marylou's all for it, but she insists on banging in the interim. She says she loves him-so does
Camille."
Then he told me how Dean had met Camille. Roy Johnson, the poolhall boy, had found her in a bar
and took her to a hotel; pride taking over his sense, he invited the whole gang to come up and see
her. Everybody sat around talking with Camille. Dean did nothing but look out the window. Then
when everybody left, Dean merely looked at Camille, pointed at his wrist, made the sign "four"
(meaning he'd be-back at four), and went out. At three the door was locked to-Roy Johnson. At four
it was opened to Dean. I wanted to go-right out and see the madman. Also he had promised to fix
me up; he knew all the girls in Denver.
Carlo and I went through rickety streets in the Denver night. The air was soft, the stars so fine, the
promise of every cobbled alley so great, that I thought I was in a dream. We came to the rooming
house where Dean haggled with* Camille. It was an old red-brick building surrounded by wooden
garages and old trees that stuck up from behind fences. We went up carpeted stairs. Carlo knocked;
then he darted to the back to hide; he didn't want Camille to see him. I stood in the door. Dean 
opened it stark naked. I saw a brunette on the bed, one beautiful creamy thigh covered with black
lace, look up with mild wonder.
"Why, Sa-a-al!" said Dean. "Well now-ah-ahem-yes, of course, you've arrived-you old sonumbitch
you finally got on that old road. Well, now, look here-we must-yes, yes, at once-we must, we really
must! Now Camille-" And he swirled on her. "Sal is here, this is my old buddy from New Yor-r-k,
this is his first night in Denver and it's absolutely necessary for me to take him out and fix him up
with a girl."
"But what time will you be back?"
 "It is now" (looking at his watch) "exactly one-fourteen. I shall be back at exactly three-fourteen,
for our hour of reverie together, real sweet reverie, darling, and then, as you know, as I told you and
as we agreed, I have to go and see the one-legged lawyer about those papers-in the middle of the
night, strange as it seems and as I tho-ro-ly explained." (This was a coverup for his rendezvous with
Carlo, who was still hiding.) "So now in this exact minute I must dress, put on my pants, go back to
life, that is to outside life, streets and what not, as we agreed, it is now one-fifteen and time's
running, running-"
"Well, all right, Dean, but please be sure and be back at three."
"Just as I said, darling, and remember not three but three-fourteen. Are we straight in the deepest
and most wonderful depths of our souls, dear darling?" And he went over and kissed her several
times. On the wall was a nude drawing of Dean, enormous dangle and all, done by Camille. I was
amazed. Everything was so crazy.
Off we rushed into the night; Carlo joined us in an alley. And we proceeded down the narrowest,
strangest, and most crooked little city street I've ever seen, deep in the heart of Denver
Mexican-town. We talked in loud voices in the sleeping stillness. "Sal," said Dean, "I have just the
girl waiting for you at this very minute-if she's off duty" (looking at his watch). "A waitress, Rita
Bettencourt, fine chick, slightly hung-up on a few sexual difficulties which I've tried to straighten
up and I think you can manage, you fine gone daddy you. So we'll go there at once-we must bring
beer, no, they have some themselves, and damn!" he said socking his palm. "I've just got to get into
her sister Mary tonight."
"What?" said Carlo. "I thought we were going to talk."
"Yes, yes, after."
"Oh, these Denver doldrums!" yelled Carlo to the sky.
"Isn't he the finest sweetest fellow in the world?" said Dean, punching me in the ribs. "Look at him.
Look at him!"
And Carlo began his monkey dance in the streets of life as I'd seen him do so many times
everywhere in New York.
And all I could say was, "Well, what the hell are we doing in Denver?" 
"Tomorrow, Sal, I know where I can find you a job," said Dean, reverting to businesslike tones. "So
I'll call on you, soon as I have an hour off from Marylou, and cut right into that apartment of yours,
say hello to Major, and take you on a trolley (damn, I've no car) to the Camargo markets, where you
can begin working at once and collect a paycheck come Friday. We're really all of us bottomry
broke. I haven't had time to work in weeks. Friday night beyond all doubt the three of us-the old
threesome of Carlo, Dean, and Sal-must go to the midget auto races, and for that I can get us a ride
from a guy downtown I know. . . ." And on and on into the night.
We got to the house where the waitress sisters lived. The one for me was still working; the sister
that Dean wanted was in. We sat down on her couch. I was scheduled at this time to call Ray
Rawlins. I did. He came over at once. Coming into the door, he took off his shirt and undershirt and
began hugging the absolute stranger, Mary Bettencourt. Bottles rolled on the floor. Three o'clock
came. Dean rushed off for his hour of reverie with Camille. He was back on time. The other sister
showed up. We all needed a car now, and we were making too much noise. Ray Rawlins called up a
buddy with a car. He came. We all piled in; Carlo was trying to conduct his scheduled talk with
Dean in the back seat, but there was too much confusion. "Let's all go to my apartment!" I shouted.
We did; the moment the car stopped there I jumped out and stood on my head in the grass. All my
keys fell out; I never found them. We ran, shouting, into the building. Roland Major stood barring
our way in his silk dressing gown.
"I'll have no goings-on like this in Tim Gray's apartment!"
"What?" we all shouted. There was confusion. Rawlins was rolling in the grass with one of the
waitresses. Major wouldn't let us in. We swore to call Tim Gray and confirm the party and also
invite him. Instead we all rushed back to the Denver downtown hangouts. I suddenly found myself
alone in the street with no money. My last dollar was gone.
I walked five miles up Colfax to my comfortable bed in the apartment. Major had to let me in. I
wondered if Dean and Carlo were having their heart-to-heart. I would find out later. The nights in
Denver are cool, and I slept like a log.
8
Then everybody began planning a tremendous trek to the mountains. This started in the morning,
together with a phone call that complicated matters-my old road friend Eddie, who took a blind
chance and called; he remembered some of the names I had mentioned. Now I had the opportunity
to get my shirt back. Eddie was with his girl in a house off Colfax. He wanted to know if I knew
where to find work, and I told him to come over, figuring Dean would know. Dean arrived,
hurrying, while Major and I were having a hasty breakfast. Dean wouldn't even sit down. "I have a
thousand things to do, in fact hardly any time to take you down Camargo, but let's go, man."
"Wait for my road buddy Eddie." 
Major found our hurrying troubles amusing. He'd come to Denver to write leisurely. He treated
Dean with extreme deference. Dean paid no attention. Major talked to Dean like this:" Moriarty,
what's this I hear about you sleeping with three girls at the same time?" And Dean shuffled on the
rug and said, "Oh yes, oh yes, that's the way it goes," and looked at his watch, and Major snuffed
down his nose. I felt sheepish rushing off with Dean-Major insisted he was a moron and a fool. Of
course he wasn't, and I wanted to prove it to everybody somehow.
We met Eddie. Dean paid no attention to him either, and off we went in a trolley across the hot
Denver noon to find the jobs. I hated the thought of it. Eddie talked and talked the way he always
did. We found a man in the markets who agreed to hire both of us; work started at four o'clock in
the morning and went till six P.M. The man said, "I like boys who like to work."
"You've got your man," said Eddie, but I wasn't so sure about myself. "I just won't sleep," I decided.
There were so many other interesting things to do.
Eddie showed up the next morning; I didn't. I had a bed, and Major bought food for the icebox, and
in exchange for that I cooked and washed the dishes. Meantime I got all involved in everything. A
big party took place at the Rawlinses' one night. The Rawlins mother was gone on a trip. Ray
Rawlins called everybody he knew and told them to bring whisky; then he went through his address
book for girls. He made me do most of the talking. A whole bunch of girls showed up. I phoned
Carlo to find out what Dean was doing now. Dean was coming to Carlo's at three in the morning. I
went there after the party.
Carlo's basement apartment was on Grant Street in an old red-brick rooming house near a church.
You went down an alley, down some stone steps, opened an old raw door, and went through a kind
of cellar till you came to his board door. It was like the room of a Russian saint: one bed, a candle
burning, stone walls that oozed moisture, and a crazy makeshift ikon of some kind that he had
made. He read me his poetry. It was called "Denver Doldrums." Carlo woke up in the morning and
heard the "vulgar pigeons" yakking in the street outside his cell; he saw the "sad nightingales"
nodding on the branches and they reminded him of his mother. A gray shroud fell over the city. The
mountains, the magnificent Rockies that you can see to the west from any part of town, were
"papier-mache." The whole universe was crazy and cockeyed and extremely strange. He wrote of
Dean as a "child of the rainbow" who bore his torment in his agonized priapus. He referred to him
as "Oedipus Eddie" who had to "scrape bubble gum off windowpanes." He brooded in his basement
over a huge journal in which he was keeping track of everything that happened every
day-everything Dean did and said.
Dean came on schedule. "Everything's straight," he announced. "I'm going to divorce Marylou and
marry Camille and go live with her in San Francisco. But this is only after you and I, dear Carlo, go
to Texas, dig Old Bull Lee, that gone cat I've never met and both of you've told me so much about,
and then I'll go to San Fran." 
Then they got down to business. They sat on the bed crosslegged and looked straight at each other.
I slouched in a nearby chair and saw all of it. They began with an abstract thought, discussed it;
reminded each other of another abstract point forgotten in the rush of events; Dean apologized but
promised he could get back to it and manage it fine, bringing up illustrations.
Carlo said, "And just as we were crossing Wazee I wanted to tell you about how I felt of your
frenzy with the midgets and it was just then, remember, you pointed out that old bum with the
baggy pants and said he looked just like your father?"
"Yes, yes, of course I remember; and not only that, but it started a train of my own, something real
wild that I had to tell you, I'd forgotten it, now you just reminded me of it . . ." and two new points
were born. They hashed these over. Then Carlo asked Dean if he was honest and specifically if he
was being honest with him in the bottom of his soul.
"Why do you bring that up again?"
"There's one last thing I want to know-"
"But, dear Sal, you're listening, you're sitting there, we'll ask Sal. What would he say?"
And I said, "That last thing is what you can't get, Carlo. Nobody can get to that last thing. We keep
on living in hopes of catching it once for all."
 "No, no, no, you're talking absolute bullshit and Wolfean romantic posh!" said Carlo.
And Dean said, "I didn't mean that at all, but we'll let Sal have his own mind, and in fact, don't you
think, Carlo, there's a kind of a dignity in the way he's sitting there and digging us, crazy cat came
all the way across the country-old Sal won't tell, old Sal won't tell."
"It isn't that I won't tell," I protested. "I just don't know what you're both driving at or trying to get
at. I know it's too much for anybody."
"Everything you say is negative."
"Then what is it you're trying to do?"
"Tell him."
"No, you tell him."
"There's nothing to tell," I said and laughed. I had on Carlo's hat. I pulled it down over my eyes. "I
want to sleep," I said.
"Poor Sal always wants to sleep." I kept quiet. They started in again. "When you borrowed that
nickel to make up the check for the chicken-fried steaks-"
"No, man, the chili! Remember, the Texas Star?"
"I was mixing it with Tuesday. When you borrowed that nickel you said, now listen, you said,
'Carlo, this is the last time I'll impose on you,' as if, and really, you meant that I had agreed with
you about no more imposing."
"No, no, no, I didn't mean that-you harken back now if you will, my dear fellow, to the night
Marylou was crying in the room, and when, turning to you and indicating by my extra added 
sincerity of tone which we both knew was contrived but had its intention, that is, by my play-acting
I showed that- But wait, that isn't it."
"Of course that isn't it! Because you forget that- But I'll stop accusing you. Yes is what I said . . ."
And on, on into the night they talked like this. At dawn I looked up. They were tying up the last of
the morning's matters. "When I said to you that I had to sleep because of Marylou, that is, seeing
her this morning at ten, I didn't bring my peremptory tone to bear in regard to what you'd just said
about the unnecessariness of sleep but only, only, mind you, because of the fact that I absolutely,
simply, purely and without any whatevers have to sleep now, I mean, man, my eyes are closing,
they're redhot, sore, tired, beat . . ."
"Ah, child," said Carlo.
"We'll just have to sleep now. Let's stop the machine."
"You can't stop the machine!" yelled Carlo at the top of his voice. The first birds sang.
"Now, when I raise my hand," said Dean, "we'll stop talking, we'll both understand purely and
without any hassle that we are simply stopping talking, and we'll just sleep."
"You can't stop the machine like that."
"Stop the machine," I said. They looked at me.
"He's been awake all this time, listening. What were you thinking, Sal?" I told them that I was
thinking they were very amazing maniacs and that I had spent the whole night listening to them like
a man watching the mechanism of a watch that reached clear to the top of Berthoud Pass and yet
was made with the smallest works of the most delicate watch in the world. They smiled. I pointed
my finger at them and said, "If you keep this up you'll both go crazy, but let me know what happens
as you go along."
I walked out and took a trolley to my apartment, and Carlo Marx's papier-mache mountains grew
red as the great sun rose from the eastward plains.
9
In the evening I was involved in that trek to the mountains and didn't see Dean or Carlo for five
days. Babe Rawlins had the use of her employer's car for the weekend. We brought suits and hung
them on the car windows and took off for Central City, Ray Rawlins driving, Tim Gray lounging in
the back, and Babe up front. It was my first view of the interior of the Rockies. Central City is an
old mining town that was once called the Richest Square Mile in the World, where a veritable shelf
of silver had been found by the old buzzards who roamed the hills. They grew wealthy overnight
and had a beautiful little opera house built in the midst of their shacks on the steep slope. Lillian
Russell had come there, and opera stars from Europe. Then Central City became a ghost town, till
the energetic Chamber of Commerce types of the new West decided to revive the place. They
polished up the opera house, and every summer stars from the Metropolitan came out and 
performed. It was a big vacation for everybody. Tourists came from everywhere, even Hollywood
stars. We drove up the mountain and found the narrow streets chock full of chichi tourists. I thought
of Major's Sam, and Major was right. Major himself was there, turning on his big social smile to
everybody and ooh-ing and aah-ing most sincerely over everything. "Sal," he cried, clutching my
arm, "just look at this old town. Think how it was a hundred- what the hell, only eighty, sixty years
ago; they had opera!"
"Yeah," I said, imitating one of his characters, "but they're here."
 "The bastards," he cursed. But he went off to enjoy himself, Betty Gray on his arm.
Babe Rawlins was an enterprising blonde. She knew of an old miner's house at the edge of town
where we boys could sleep for the weekend; all we had to do was clean it out. We could also throw
vast parties there. It was an old shack of a thing covered with an inch of dust inside; it had a porch
and a well in back. Tim Gray and Ray Rawlins rolled up their sleeves and started in cleaning it, a
major job that took them all afternoon and part of the night. But they had a bucket of beerbottles
and everything was fine.
As for me, I was scheduled to be a guest at the opera that afternoon, escorting Babe on my arm. I
wore a suit of Tim's. Only a few days ago I'd come into Denver like a bum; now I was all racked up
sharp in a suit, with a beautiful well-dressed blonde on my arm, bowing to dignitaries and chatting
in the lobby under chandeliers. I wondered what Mississippi Gene would say if he could see me.
The opera was Fidelia. "What gloom!" cried the baritone, rising out of the dungeon under a
groaning stone. I cried for it. That's how I see life too. I was so interested in the opera that for a
while I forgot the circumstances of my crazy life and got lost in the great mournful sounds of
Beethoven and the rich Rembrandt tones of his story.
"Well, Sal, how did you like the production for this year?" asked Denver D. Doll proudly in the
street outside. He was connected with the opera association.
"What gloom, what gloom," I said. "It's absolutely great."
"The next thing you'll have to do is meet the members of the cast," he went on in his official tones,
but luckily he forgot this in the rush of other things, and vanished.
Babe and I went back to the miner's shack. I took off my duds and joined the boys in the cleaning.
It was an enormous job. Roland Major sat in the middle of the front room that had already been
cleaned and refused to help. On a little table in front of him he had his bottle of beer and his glass.
As we rushed around with buckets of water and brooms he reminisced. "Ah, if you could just come
with me sometime and drink Cinzano and hear the musicians of Bandol, then you'd be living. Then
there's Normandy in the summers, the sabots, the fine old Calvados. Come on, Sam," he said to his
invisible pal. "Take the wine out of the water and let's see if it got cold enough while we fished."
Straight out of Hemingway, it was.
We called out to girls who went by in the street. "Come on help us clean up the joint. Everybody's 
invited to our party tonight." They joined us. We had a huge crew working for us. Finally the
singers in the opera chorus, mostly young kids, came over and pitched in. The sun went down.
Our day's work over, Tim, Rawlins, and I decided to sharp up for the big night. We went across
town to the rooming house where the opera stars were living. Across the night we heard the
beginning of the evening performance. "Just right," said Rawlins. "Latch on to some of these razors
and towels and we'll spruce up a bit." We also took hairbrushes, colognes, shaving lotions, and went
laden into the bathroom. We all took baths and sang. "Isn't this great?" Tim Gray kept saying.
"Using the opera stars' bathroom and towels and shaving lotion and electric razors."
It was a wonderful night. Central City is two miles high; at first you get drunk on the altitude, then
you get tired, and there's a fever in your soul. We approached the lights around the opera house
down the narrow dark street; then we took a sharp right and hit some old saloons with swinging
doors. Most of the tourists were in the opera. We started off with a few extra-size beers. There was
a player piano. Beyond the back door was a view of mountainsides in the moonlight. I let out a
yahoo. The night was on.
We hurried back to our miner's shack. Everything was in preparation for the big party. The girls,
Babe and Betty, cooked up a snack of beans and franks, and then we danced and started on the beer
for fair. The opera over, great crowds of young girls came piling into our place. Rawlins and Tim
and I licked our lips. We grabbed them and danced. There was no music, just dancing. The place
filled up. People began to bring bottles. We rushed out to hit the bars and rushed back.
The night was getting more and more frantic. I wished Dean and Carlo were there-then I realized
they'd be out of place and unhappy. They were like the man with the dungeon stone and the gloom,
rising from the underground, the sordid hipsters of America, a new beat generation that I was
slowly joining.
The boys from the chorus showed up. They began singing "Sweet Adeline." They also sang phrases
such as "Pass me the beer" and "What are you doing with your face hanging out?" and great long
baritone howls of "Fi-de-lio!" "Ah me, what gloom!" I sang. The girls were terrific. They went out
in the backyard and necked with us. There were beds in the other rooms, the uncleaned dusty ones,
and I had a girl sitting on one and was talking with her when suddenly there was a great inrush of
young ushers from the opera, who just grabbed girls and kissed them without proper come-ons.
Teenagers, drunk, disheveled, excited-they ruined our party. Inside of five minutes every single girl
was gone and a great big fraternity-type party got under way with banging of beerbottles and roars.
Ray and Tim and I decided to hit the bars. Major was gone, Babe and Betty were gone. We tottered
into the night. The opera crowd was jamming the bars from bar to wall. Major was shouting above
heads. The eager, bespectacled Denver D. Doll was shaking hands with everybody and saying,
"Good afternoon, how are you?" and when midnight came he was saying, "Good afternoon, how
are you?" At one point I saw him going off somewhere with a dignitary. Then he came back with a 
middle-aged woman; next minute he was talking to a couple of young ushers in the street. The next
minute he was shaking my hand without recognizing me and saying, "Happy New Year, m'boy." He
wasn't drunk on liquor, just drunk on what he liked-crowds of people milling. Everybody knew him.
"Happy New Year," he called, and sometimes "Merry Christmas." He said this all the time. At
Christmas he said Happy Halloween.
There was a tenor in the bar who was highly respected by everyone; Denver Doll had insisted that I
meet him and I was trying to avoid it; his name was D'Annunzio or some such thing. His wife was
with him. They sat sourly at a table. There was also some kind of Argentinian tourist at the bar.
Rawlins gave him a shove to make room; he turned and snarled. Rawlins handed me his glass and
knocked him down on the brass rail with one punch. The man was momentarily out. There were
screams; Tim and I scooted Rawlins out. There was so much confusion the sheriff couldn't even
thread his way through the crowd to find the victim. Nobody could identify Rawlins. We went to
other bars. Major staggered up a dark street. "What the hell's the matter? Any fights? Just call on
me." Great laughter rang from all sides. I wondered what the Spirit of the Mountain was thinking,
and looked up and saw jackpines in the moon, and saw ghosts of old miners, and wondered about it.
In the whole eastern dark wall of the Divide this night there was silence and the whisper of the
wind, except in the ravine where we roared; and on the other side of the Divide was the great
Western Slope, and the big plateau that went to Steamboat Springs, and dropped, and led you to the
western Colorado desert and the Utah desert; all in darkness now as we fumed and screamed in our
mountain nook, mad drunken Americans in the mighty land. We were on the roof of America and
all we could do was yell, I guess-across the night, eastward over the Plains, where somewhere an
old man with white hair was probably walking toward us with the Word, and would arrive any
minute and make us silent.
Rawlins insisted on going back to the bar where he'd fought. Tim and I didn't like it but stuck to
him. He went up to D'Annunzio, the tenor, and threw a highball in his face. We dragged him out. A
baritone singer from the chorus joined us and we went to a regular Central City bar. Here Ray
called the waitress a whore. A group of sullen men were ranged along the bar; they hated tourists.
One of them said, "You boys better be out of here by the count of ten." We were. We staggered back
to the shack and went to sleep.
In the morning I woke up and turned over; a big cloud of dust rose from the mattress. I yanked at
the window; it was nailed. Tim Gray was in the bed too. We coughed and sneezed. Our breakfast
consisted of stale beer. Babe came back from her hotel and we got our things together to leave.
Everything seemed to be collapsing. As we were going out to the car Babe slipped and fell flat on
her face. Poor girl was overwrought. Her brother and Tim and I helped her up. We got in the car;
Major and Betty joined us. The sad ride back to Denver began.
Suddenly we came down from the mountain and overlooked the great sea-plain of Denver; heat 
rose as from an oven. We began to sing songs. I was itching to get on to San Francisco.
10
That night I found Carlo and to my amazement he told me he'd been in Central City with Dean.
"What did you do?"
"Oh, we ran around the bars and then Dean stole a car and we drove back down the mountain
curves ninety miles an hour."
"I didn't see you."
"We didn't know you were there."
"Well, man, I'm going to San Francisco."
"Dean has Rita lined up for you tonight."
"Well, then, I'll put it off." I had no money. I sent my aunt an airmail letter asking her for fifty
dollars and said it would be the last money I'd ask; after that she would be getting money back from
me, as soon as I got that ship.
Then I went to meet Rita Bettencourt and took her back to the apartment. I got her in my bedroom
after a long talk in the dark of the front room. She was a nice little girl, simple and true, and
tremendously frightened of sex. I told her it was beautiful. I wanted to prove this to her. She let me
prove it, but I was too impatient and proved nothing. She sighed in the dark. "What do you want
out of life?" I asked, and I used to ask that all the time of girls.
"I don't know," she said. "Just wait on tables and try to get along." She yawned. I put my hand over
her mouth and told her not to yawn. I tried to tell her how excited I was about life and the things we
could do together; saying that, and planning to leave Denver in two days. She turned away wearily.
We lay on our backs, looking at the ceiling and wondering what God had wrought when He made
life so sad. We made vague plans to meet in Frisco.
My moments in Denver were coming to an end, I could feel it when I walked her home, on the way
back I stretched out on the grass of an old church with a bunch of hobos, and their talk made me
want to get back on that road. Every now and then one would get up and hit a passer-by for a dime.
They talked of harvests moving north. It was warm and soft. I wanted to go and get Rita again and
tell her a lot more things, and really make love to her this time, and calm her fears about men. Boys
and girls in America have such a sad time together; sophistication demands that they submit to sex
immediately without proper preliminary talk. Not courting talk-real straight talk about souls, for
life is holy and every moment is precious. I heard the Denver and Rio Grande locomotive howling
off to the mountains. I wanted to pursue my star further.
Major and I sat sadly talking in the midnight hours. "Have you ever read Green Hills of Africa? It's
Hemingway's best." We wished each other luck. We would meet in Frisco. 1 saw Rawlins under a
dark tree in the street. "Good-by, Ray. When do we meet again?" I went to look for Carlo and Dean 
-nowhere to be found. Tim Gray shot his hand up in the air and said, "So you're leaving, Yo." We
called each other Yo. "Yep," I said. The next few days I wandered around Denver.
It seemed to me every bum on Larimer Street maybe was Dean Moriarty's father; Old Dean
Moriarty they called him, the Tinsmith. I went in the Windsor Hotel, where father and son had lived
and where one night Dean was frightfully waked up by the legless man on the rollerboard who
shared the room with them; he came thundering across the floor on his terrible wheels to touch the
boy. I saw the little midget newspaper-selling woman with the short legs, on the corner of Curtis
and 15th. I walked around the sad honkytonks of Curtis Street; young kids in jeans and red shirts;
peanut shells, movie marquees, shooting parlors. Beyond the glittering street was darkness, and
beyond the darkness the West. I had to go.
At dawn I found Carlo. I read some of his enormous journal, slept there, and in the morning, drizzly
and gray, tall, six-foot Ed Dunkel came in with Roy Johnson, a handsome kid, and Tom Snark, the
clubfooted poolshark. They sat around and listened with abashed smiles as Carlo Marx read them
his apocalyptic, mad poetry. I slumped in my chair, finished. "Oh ye Denver birds!" cried Carlo. We
all filed out and went up a typical cobbled Denver alley between incinerators smoking slowly. "I
used to roll my hoop up this alley," Chad King had told me. I wanted to see him do it; I wanted to
see Denver ten years ago when they were all children, and in the sunny cherry blossom morning of
springtime in the Rockies rolling their hoops up the joyous alleys full of promise-the whole gang.
And Dean, ragged and dirty, prowling by himself in his preoccupied frenzy.
Roy Johnson and I walked in the drizzle; I went to Eddie's girl's house to get back my wool plaid
shirt, the shirt of Shelton, Nebraska. It was there, all tied up, the whole enormous sadness of a shirt.
Roy Johnson said he'd meet me in Frisco. Everybody was going to Frisco. I went and found my
money had arrived. The sun came out, and Tim Gray rode a trolley with me to the bus station. I
bought my ticket to San Fran, spending half of the fifty, and got on at two o'clock in the afternoon.
Tim Gray waved good-by. The bus rolled out of the storied, eager Denver streets. "By God, I gotta
come back and see what else will happen!" I promised. In a last-minute phone call Dean said he
and Carlo might join me on the Coast; I pondered this, and realized I hadn't talked to Dean for more
than five minutes in the whole time.
11
I was two weeks late meeting Remi Boncoeur. The bus trip from Denver to Frisco was uneventful
except that my whole soul leaped to it the nearer we got to Frisco. Cheyenne again, in the afternoon
this time, and then west over the range; crossing the Divide at midnight at Creston, arriving at Salt
Lake City at dawn-a city of sprinklers, the least likely place for Dean to have been born; then out to
Nevada in the hot sun, Reno by nightfall, its twinkling Chinese streets; then up the Sierra Nevada, 
pines, stars, mountain lodges signifying Frisco romances-a little girl in the back seat, crying to her
mother, "Mama when do we get home to Truckee?" And Truckee itself, homey Truckee, and then
down the hill to the flats of Sacramento. I suddenly realized I was in California. Warm, palmy
air-air you can kiss-and palms. Along the storied Sacramento River on a superhighway; into the
hills again; up, down; and suddenly the vast expanse of bay (it was just before dawn) with the
sleepy lights of Frisco festooned across. Over the Oakland Bay Bridge I slept soundly for the first
time since Denver; so that I was rudely jolted in the bus station at Market and Fourth into the
memory of the fact that I was three thousand two hundred miles from my aunt's house in Paterson,
New Jersey. I wandered out like a haggard ghost, and there she was, Frisco-long,. bleak streets with
trolley wires all shrouded in fog and whiteness. I stumbled around a few blocks. Weird bums
(Mission and Third) asked me for dimes in the dawn. I heard music somewhere. "Boy, am I going
to dig all this later! But now I've got to find Remi Boncceur."
Mill City, where Remi lived, was a collection of shacks in a valley, housing-project shacks built for
Navy Yard workers during the war; it was in a canyon, and a deep one, treed profusedly on all
slopes. There were special stores and barber shops and tailor shops for the people of the project. It
was, so they say, the only community in America where whites and Negroes lived together
voluntarily; and that was so, and so wild and joyous a place I've never seen since. On the door of
Remi's shack was the note he had pinned up there three weeks ago.
Sal Paradise! [in huge letters, printed] If nobody's home climb in through the window.
Signed,
Remi Boncoeur.
The note was weatherbeaten and gray by now.
I climbed in and there he was, sleeping with his girl, Lee Ann-on a bed he stole from a merchant
ship, as he told me later; imagine the deck engineer of a merchant ship sneaking over the side in the
middle of the night with a bed, and heaving and straining at the oars to shore. This barely explains
Remi Boncoeur.
The reason I'm going into everything that happened in San Fran is because it ties up with
everything else all the way down the line. Remi Boncoeur and I met at prep school years ago; but
the thing that really linked us together was my former wife. Remi found her first. He came into my
dorm room one night and said, "Paradise, get up, the old maestro has come to see you." I got up and
dropped some pennies on the floor when I put my pants on. It was four in the afternoon; I used to
sleep all the time in college. "All right, all right, don't drop your gold all over the place. I have
found the gonest little girl in the world and I am going straight to the Lion's Den with her tonight."
And he dragged me to meet her. A week later she was going with me. Remi was a tall, dark, hand=
some Frenchman (he looked like a kind of Marseille black-marketeer of twenty); because he was 
French he had to talk in jazz American; his English was perfect, his French was perfect. He liked to
dress sharp, slightly on the collegiate side, and go out with fancy blondes and spend a lot of money.
It's not that he ever blamed me for taking off with his girl; it was only a point that always tied us
together; that guy was loyal to me and had real affection for me, and God knows why.
When I found him in Mill City that morning he had fallen on the beat and evil days that come to
young guys in their middle twenties. He was hanging around waiting for a ship, and to earn his
living he had a job as a special guard in the barracks across the canyon. His girl Lee Ann had a bad
tongue and gave him a calldown every day. They spent all week saving pennies and went out
Saturdays to spend fifty bucks in three hours. Remi wore shorts around the shack, with a crazy
Army cap on his head. Lee Ann went around with her hair up in pincurls. Thus attired, they yelled
at each other all week. 1 never saw so many snarls in all my born days. But on Saturday night,
smiling graciously at each other, they took off like a pair of successful Hollywood characters and
went on the town.
Remi woke up and saw me come in the window. His great laugh, one of the greatest laughs in the
world, dinned in my ear. "Aaaaah Paradise, he comes in through the window, he follows
instructions to a T. Where have you been, you're two weeks late!" He slapped me on the back, he
punched Lee Ann in the ribs, he leaned on the wall and laughed and cried, he pounded the table so
you could hear it everywhere in Mill City, and that great long "Aaaaah" resounded around the
canyon. "Paradise!" he screamed. "The one and only indispensable Paradise."
I had just come through the little fishing village of Sausalito, and the first thing I said was, "There
must be a lot of Italians in Sausalito."
"There must be a lot of Italians in Sausalito!" he shouted at the top of his lungs. "Aaaaah!" He
pounded himself, he fell on the bed, he almost rolled on the floor. "Did you hear what Paradise
said? There must be a lot of Italians in Sausalito? Aaaah-haaa! Hoo! Wow! Wheel" He got red as a
beet, laughing. "Oh, you slay me, Paradise, you're the funniest man in the world, and here you are,
you finally got here, he came in through the window, you saw him, Lee Ann, he followed
instructions and came in through the window. Aaah! Hooo!"
The strange thing was that next door to Remi lived a Negro called Mr. Snow whose laugh, I swear
on the Bible, was positively and finally the one greatest laugh in all this world. This Mr. Snow
began his laugh from the supper table when his old wife said something casual; he got up,
apparently choking, leaned on the wall, looked up to heaven, and started; he staggered through the
door, leaning on neighbors' walls; he was drunk with it, he reeled throughout Mill City in the
shadows, raising his whooping triumphant call to the demon god that must have prodded him to do
it. I don't know if he ever finished supper. There's a possibility that Remi, without knowing it, was
picking up from this amazing man, Mr. Snow. And though Remi was having worklife problems and
bad lovelife with a sharp-tongued woman, he at least had learned to laugh almost better than 
anyone in the world, and I saw all the fun we were going to have in Frisco.
The pitch was this: Remi slept with Lee Ann in the bed across the room, and I slept in the cot by the
window. I was not to touch Lee Ann. Remi at once made a speech concerning this. "I don't want to
find you two playing around when you think I'm not looking. You can't teach the old maestro a new
tune. This is an original saying of mine." I looked at Lee Ann. She was a fetching hunk, a
honey-colored creature, but there was hate in her eyes for both of us. Her ambition was to marry a
rich man. She came from a small town in Oregon. She rued the day she ever took up with Remi. On
one of his big showoff weekends he spent a hundred dollars on her and she thought she'd found an
heir. Instead she was hung-up in this shack, and for lack of anything else she had to stay there. She
had a job in Frisco; she had to take the Greyhound bus at the crossroads and go in every day. She
never forgave Remi for it.
I was to stay in the shack and write a shining original story for a Hollywood studio. Remi was
going to fly down in a stratosphere liner with this harp under his arm and make us all rich; Lee Ann
was to go with him; he was going to introduce her to his buddy's father, who was a famous director
and an intimate of W. C. Fields. So the first week I stayed in the shack in Mill City, writing
furiously at some gloomy tale about New York that I thought would satisfy a Hollywood director,
and the trouble with it was that it was too sad. Remi could barely read it, and so he just carried it
down to Hollywood a few weeks later. Lee Ann was too bored and hated us too much to bother
reading it. I spent countless rainy hours drinking coffee and scribbling. Finally I told Remi it
wouldn't do; I wanted a job; I had to depend on them for cigarettes. A shadow of disappointment
crossed Remi's brow-he was always being disappointed about the funniest things. He had a heart of
gold.
He arranged to get me the same kind of job he had, as a guard in the barracks. I went through the
necessary routine, and to my surprise the bastards hired me. I was sworn in by the local police chief,
given a badge, a club, and now I was a special policeman. I wondered what Dean and Carlo and
Old Bull Lee would say about this. I had to have navy-blue trousers to go with my black jacket and
cop cap; for the first two weeks I had to wear Remi's trousers; since he was so tall, and had a
potbelly from eating voracious meals out of boredom, I went flapping around like Charlie Chaplin
to my first night of work. Remi gave me a flashlight and his .32 automatic.
"Where'd you get this gun?" I asked.
"On my way to the Coast last summer I jumped off the train at North Platte, Nebraska, to stretch
my legs, and what did I see in the window but this unique little gun, which I promptly bought and
barely made the train."
And I tried to tell him what North Platte meant to me, buy-mg the whisky with the boys, and he
slapped me on the back and said I was the funniest man in the world.
With the flashlight to illuminate my way, I climbed the steep walls of the south canyon, got up on 
the highway streaming! with cars Frisco-bound in the night, scrambled down the other! side, almost
falling, and came to the bottom of a ravine where! a little farmhouse stood near a creek and where
every blessed! night the same dog barked at me. Then it was a fast walk along a silvery, dusty road
beneath inky trees of California-a I road like in The Mark of Zorro and a road like all the roads!
you see in Western B movies. I used to take out my gun and] play cowboys in the dark. Then I
climbed another hill and! there were the barracks. These barracks were for the temporary quartering
of overseas construction workers. The men| who came through stayed there, waiting for their ship.
Most] of them were bound for Okinawa. Most of them were running | away from
something-usually the law. There were tough 9 groups from Alabama, shifty men from New York,
all kinds j from all over. And, knowing full well how horrible it would* be to work a full year in
Okinawa, they drank. The job of the*j special guards was to see that they didn't tear the barracks'
down. We had our headquarters in the main building, just a wooden contraption with panel-walled
offices. Here at a roll-  top desk we sat around, shifting our guns off our hips and! yawning, and
the old cops told stories.
It was a horrible crew of men, men with cop-souls, all except Remi and myself. Remi was only
trying to make a living, and so was I, but these men wanted to make arrests and compliments from
the chief of police in town. They even said < that if you didn't make at least one a month you'd be
fired. I" gulped at the prospect of making an arrest. What actually' happened was that I was as
drunk as anybody in the barracks -the night all hell broke loose.
This was a night when the schedule was so arranged that 1 was all alone for six hours-the only cop
on the grounds; and * everybody in the barracks seemed to have gotten drunk that' night. It was
because their ship was leaving in the morning. < They drank like seamen the night before the
anchor goes up. I sat in the office with my feet on the desk, reading Blue Book' adventures about
Oregon and the north country, when suddenly I realized there was a great hum of activity in the
usually quiet night. I went out. Lights were burning in practically every damned shack on the
grounds. Men were shouting, bottles were breaking. It was do or die for me. I took my flashlight
and went to the noisiest door and knocked. Someone opened it about six inches.
"What do you want?"
I said, "I'm guarding these barracks tonight and you boys are supposed to keep quiet as much as
you can"-or some such silly remark. They slammed the door in my face. I stood looking at the
wood of it against my nose. It was like a Western movie; the time had come for me to assert myself.
I knocked again. They opened up wide this time. "Listen," I said, "I don't want to come around
bothering you fellows, but I'll lose my job if you make too much noise."
"Who are you?"
"I'm a guard here."
"Never seen you before." 
"Well, here's my badge."
"What are you doing with that pistolcracker on your ass?"
"It isn't mine," I apologized. "I borrowed it."
"Have a drink, fer krissakes." I didn't mind if I did. I took two.
I said, "Okay, boys? You'll keep quiet, boys? I'll get hell, you know."
"It's all right, kid," they said. "Go make your rounds. Come back for another drink if you want
one."
And I went to all the doors in this manner, and pretty soon I was as drunk as anybody else. Come
dawn, it was my duty to put up the American flag on a sixty-foot pole, and this morning I put it up
upside down and went home to bed. When I came back in the evening the regular cops were sitting
around grimly in the office.
"Say, bo, what was all the noise around here last night? We've had complaints from people who live
in those houses across the canyon."
"I don't know," I said. "It sounds pretty quiet right now."
"The whole contingent's gone. You was supposed to keep order around here last night-the chief is
yelling at you. And another thing-do you know you can go to jail for putting the American flag
upside down on a government pole?"
"Upside down?" I was horrified; of course I hadn't realized it. I did it every morning mechanically.
"Yessir," said a fat cop who'd spent twenty-two years as a guard in Alcatraz. "You could go to jail
for doing something like that." The others nodded grimly. They were always sitting around on their
asses; they were proud of their jobs. They handled their guns and talked about them. They were
itching to shoot somebody. Remi and me.
The cop who had been an Alcatraz guard was potbellied and about sixty, retired but unable to keep
away from the atmospheres that had nourished his dry soul all his life. Every night he drove to
work in his '35 Ford, punched the clock exactly on time, and sat down at the rolltop desk. He
labored painfully over the simple form we all had to fill out every night-rounds, time, what
happened, and so on. Then he leaned back and told stories. "You should have been here about two
months ago when me and Sledge" (that was another cop, a youngster who wanted to be a Texas
Ranger and had to be satisfied with his present lot) "arrested a drunk in Barrack G. Boy, you should
have seen the blood fly. I'll take you over there tonight and show you the stains on the wall. We had
him bouncing from one wall to another. First Sledge hit him, and then me, and then he subsided and
went quietly. That fellow swore to kill us when he got out of jail-got thirty days. Here it is sixty
days, and he ain't showed up." And this was the big point of the story. They'd put such a fear in him
that he was too yellow to come back and try to kill them.
The old cop went on, sweetly reminiscing about the horrors of Alcatraz. "We used to march 'em like
an Army platoon to breakfast. Wasn't one man out of step. Everything went like clockwork. You 
should have seen it. I was a guard there for twenty-two years. Never had any trouble. Those boys
knew we meant business. A lot of fellows get soft guarding prisoners, and they're the ones that
usually get in trouble. Now you take you-from what I've been observing about you, you seem to me
a little bit too leenent with the men." He raised his pipe and looked at me sharp. "They take
advantage of that, you know."
I knew that. I told him I wasn't cut out to be a cop.
"Yes, but that's the job that you applied for. Now you got to make up your mind one way or the
other, or you'll never get anywhere. It's your duty. You're sworn in. You can't compromise with
things like this. Law and order's got to be kept."
I didn't know what to say; he was right; but all I wanted to do was sneak out into the night and
disappear somewhere, and go and find out what everybody was doing all over the country.
The other cop, Sledge, was tall, muscular, with a black-haired crew-cut and a nervous twitch in his
neck-like a boxer who's always punching one fist into another. He rigged himself out like a Texas
Ranger of old. He wore a revolver down low, with ammunition belt, and carried a small quirt of
some kind, and pieces of leather hanging everywhere, like a walking torture chamber: shiny shoes,
low-hanging jacket, cocky hat, everything but boots. He was always showing me holds- reaching
down under my crotch and lifting me up nimbly. In point of strength I could have thrown him clear
to the ceiling with the same hold, and I knew it well; but I never let him know for fear he'd want a
wrestling match. A wrestling match with a guy like that would end up in shooting. I'm sure he was a
better shot; I'd never had a gun in my life. It scared me even to load one. He desperately wanted to
make arrests. One night we were alone on duty and he came back red-faced mad.
"I told some boys in there to keep quiet and they're still making noise. I told them twice. I always
give a man two chances. Not three. You come with me and I'm going back there and arrest them."
"Well, let me give them a third chance," I said. "I'll talk to them."
"No, sir, I never gave a man more than two chances." I sighed. Here we go. We went to the
offending room, and Sledge opened the door and told everybody to file out. It was embarrassing.
Every single one of us was blushing. This is the story of America. Everybody's doing what they
think they're supposed to do. So what if a bunch of men talk in loud voices and drink the night? But
Sledge wanted to prove something. He made sure to bring me along in case they jumped him. They
might have. They were all brothers, all from Alabama. We strolled back to the station, Sledge in
front and me in back.
One of the boys said to me, "Tell that crotch-eared mean-ass to take it easy on us. We might get
fired for this and never get to Okinawa."
"I'll talk to him."
In the station I told Sledge to forget it. He said, for everybody to hear, and blushing, "I don't give
anybody no more than two chances." 
"What the hail," said the Alabaman, "what difference does it make? We might lose our jobs."
Sledge said nothing and filled out the arrest forms. He arrested only one of them; he called the
prowl car in town. They came and took him away. The other brothers walked off sullenly. "What's
Ma going to say?" they said. One of them came back to me. "You tell that Tex-ass son of a bitch if
my brother ain't out of jail tomorrow night he's going to get his ass fixed." I told Sledge, in a neutral
way, and he said nothing. The brother was let off easy and nothing happened. The contingent
shipped out; a new wild bunch came in. If it hadn't been for Remi Boncoeur I wouldn't have stayed
at this job two hours.
But Remi Boncceur and I were on duty alone many a night, and that's when everything jumped. We
made our first round of the evening in a leisurely way, Remi trying all the doors to see if they were
locked and hoping to find one unlocked. He'd say, "For years I've an idea to develop a dog into a
super thief who'd go into these guys' rooms and take dollars out of their pockets. I'd train him to
take nothing but green money; I'd make him smell it all day long. If there was any humanly
possible way, I'd train him to take only twenties." Remi was full of mad schemes; he talked about
that dog for weeks. Only once he found an unlocked door. I didn't like the idea, so I sauntered on
down the hall. Remi stealthily opened it up. He came face to face with the barracks supervisor.
Remi hated that man's face. He asked me, "What's the name of that Russian author you're always
talking about-the one who put the newspapers in his shoe and walked around in a stovepipe hat he
found in a garbage pail?" This was an exaggeration of what I'd told Remi of Dostoevski. "Ah, that's
it-that's it- Dostioffski. A man with a face like that supervisor can only have one name-it's
Dostioffski." The only unlocked door he ever found belonged to Dostioffski. D. was asleep when
he heard someone fiddling with his doorknob. He got up in his pajamas. He came to the door
looking twice as ugly as usual. When Remi opened it he saw a haggard face suppurated with hatred
and dull fury.
"What is the meaning of this?"
"I was only trying this door. I thought this was the-ah- mop room. I was looking for a mop."
"What do you mean you were looking for a mop?"
"Well-ah."
And I stepped up and said, "One of the men puked in the hall upstairs. We have to mop it up."
"This is not the mop room. This is my room. Another incident like this and I'll have you fellows
investigated and thrown out! Do you understand me clearly?"
"A fellow puked upstairs," I said again.
"The mop room is down the hall. Down there." And he pointed, and waited for us to go and get a
mop, which we did, and foolishly carried it upstairs.
I said, "Goddammit, Remi, you're always getting us into trouble. Why don't you lay off? Why do
you have to steal all the time?" 
"The world owes me a few things, that's all. You can't teach the old maestro a new tune. You go on
talking like that and I'm going to start calling you Dostioffski."
Remi was just like a little boy. Somewhere in his past, in his lonely schooldays in France, they'd
taken everything from him; his stepparents just stuck him in schools and left him there; he was
browbeaten and thrown out of one school after another; he walked the French roads at night
devising curses out of his innocent stock of words. He was out to get back everything he'd lost;
there was no end to his loss; this thing would drag on forever.
The barracks cafeteria was our meat. We looked around to make sure nobody was watching, and
especially to see if any of our cop friends were lurking about to check on us; then I squatted down,
and Remi put a foot on each shoulder and up he went. He opened the window, which was never
locked since he saw to it in the evenings, scrambled through, and came down on the flour table. I
was a little more agile and just jumped and crawled in. Then we went to the soda fountain. Here,
realizing a dream of mine from infancy, I took the cover off the chocolate ice cream and stuck my
hand in wrist-deep and hauled me up a skewer of ice cream and licked at it. Then we got ice-cream
boxes and stuffed them, poured chocolate syrup over and sometimes strawberries too, then walked
around in the kitchens, opened iceboxes, to see what we could take home in our pockets. I often
tore off a piece of roast beef and wrapped it in a napkin. "You know what President Truman said,"
Remi would say. "We must cut down on the cost of living."
One night I waited a long time as he filled a huge box full of groceries. Then we couldn't get it
through the window. Remi had to unpack everything and put it back. Later in the night, when he
went off duty and I was all alone on the base, a strange thing happened. I was taking a walk along
the old canyon trail, hoping to meet a deer (Remi had seen deer around, that country being wild
even in 1947), when I heard a frightening noise in the dark. It was a huffing and puffing. I thought
it was a rhinoceros coming for me in the dark. I grabbed my gun. A tall figure appeared in the
canyon gloom; it had an enormous head. Suddenly I realized it was Remi with a huge box of
groceries on his shoulder. He was moaning and groaning from the enormous weight of it. He'd
found the key to the cafeteria somewhere and had got his groceries out the front door. I said, "Remi,
I thought you were home; what the hell are you doing?"
And he said, "Paradise, I have told you several times what President Truman said, we must cut
down on the cost of living." And I heard him huff and puff into the darkness. I've already described
that awful trail back to our shack, up hill and down dale. He hid the groceries in the tall grass and
came back to me. "Sal, I just can't make it alone. I'm going to divide it into two boxes and you're
going to help me."
"But I'm on duty."
"I'll watch the place while you're gone. Things are getting rough all around. We've just got to make
it the best way we can, and that's all there is to it." He wiped his face. "Whoo! I've told you time 
and time again, Sal, that we're buddies, and we're in this thing together. There's just no two ways
about it. The Dostioffskis, the cops, the Lee Anns, all the evil skulls of this world, are out for our
skin. It's up to us to see that nobody pulls any schemes on us. They've got a lot more up their
sleeves besides a dirty arm. Remember that. You can't teach the old maestro a new tune."
I finally asked, "Whatever are we going to do about shipping out?" We'd been doing these things
for ten weeks. I was making fifty-five bucks a week and sending my aunt an average of forty. I'd
spent only one evening in San Francisco in all that time. My life was wrapped in the shack, in
Remi's battles with Lee Ann, and in the middle of the night at the barracks.
Remi was gone off in the dark to get another box. I struggled with him on that old Zorro road. We
piled up the groceries a mile high on Lee Ann's kitchen table. She woke up and rubbed her eyes.
"You know what President Truman said?" She was delighted. I suddenly began to realize that
everybody in America is a natural-born thief. I was getting the bug myself. I even began to try to
see if doors were locked. The other cops were getting suspicious of us; they saw it in our eyes; they
understood with unfailing instinct what was on our minds. Years of experience had taught them the
likes of Remi and me.
In the daytime Remi and I went out with the gun and tried to shoot quail in the hills. Remi sneaked
up to within three feet of the clucking birds and let go a blast of the .32. He missed. His tremendous
laugh roared over the California woods and over America. "The time has come for you and me to
go and see the Banana King."
It was Saturday; we got all spruced up and went down to the bus station on the crossroads. We rode
into San Francisco and strolled through the streets. Remi's huge laugh resounded everywhere we
went. "You must write a story about the Banana King," he warned me. "Don't pull any tricks on the
old maestro and write about something else. The Banana King is your meat. There stands the
Banana King." The Banana King was an old man selling bananas on the corner. I was completely
bored. But Remi kept punching me in the ribs and even dragging me along by the collar. "When
you write about the Banana King you write about the human-interest things of life." I told him I
didn't give a damn about the Banana King. "Until you learn to realize the importance of the Banana
King you will know absolutely nothing about the human-interest things of the world," said Remi
emphatically.
There was an old rusty freighter out in the bay that was used as a buoy. Remi was all for rowing out
to it, so one afternoon Lee Ann packed a lunch and we hired a boat and went out there. Remi
brought some tools. Lee Ann took all her clothes off and lay down to sun herself on the flying
bridge. I watched her from the poop. Remi went clear down to the boiler rooms below, where rats
scurried around, and began hammering and banging away for copper lining that wasn't there. I sat
in the dilapidated officer's mess. It was an old, old ship and had been beautifully appointed, with
scrollwork in the wood, and built-in seachests. This was the ghost of the San Francisco of Jack 
London. I dreamed at the sunny messboard. Rats ran in the pantry. Once upon a time there'd been a
blue-eyed sea captain dining in here.
I joined Remi in the bowels below. He yanked at everything loose. "Not a thing. I thought there'd
be copper, I thought there'd be at least an old wrench or two. This ship's been stripped by a bunch
of thieves." It had been standing in the bay for years. The copper had been stolen by a hand that
was a hand no more.
I said to Remi, "I'd love to sleep in this old ship some night when the fog comes in and the thing
creaks and you hear the big B-O of the buoys."
Remi was astounded; his admiration for me doubled. "Sal, I'll pay you five dollars if you have the
nerve to do that. Don't you realize this thing may be haunted by the ghosts of old sea captains? I'll
not only pay you five, I'll row you out and pack you a lunch and lend you blankets and candle."
"Agreed!" I said. Remi ran to tell Lee Ann. I wanted to jump down from a mast and land right in
her, but I kept my promise to Remi. I averted my eyes from her.
Meanwhile I began going to Frisco more often; I tried everything in the books to make a girl. I even
spent a whole night with a girl on a park bench, till dawn, without success. She was a blonde from
Minnesota. There were plenty of queers. Several times I went to San Fran with my gun and when a
queer approached me in a bar John I took out the gun and said, "Eh? Eh? What's that you say?" He
bolted. I've never understood why I did that; I knew queers all over the country. It was just the
loneliness of San Francisco and the fact that I had a gun. I had to show it to someone. I walked by a
jewelry store and had the sudden impulse to shoot up the window, take out the finest rings and
bracelets, and run to give them to Lee Ann. Then we could flee to Nevada together. The time was
coming for me to leave Frisco or I'd go crazy.
I wrote long letters to Dean and Carlo, who were now at Old Bull's shack in the Texas bayou. They
said they were ready to come join me in San Fran as soon as this-and-that was ready. Meanwhile
everything began to collapse with Remi and Lee Ann and me. The September rains came, and with
them harangues. Remi had flown down to Hollywood with her, taking my sad silly movie original,
and nothing had happened. The famous director was drunk and paid no attention to them; they hung
around his Malibu Beach cottage; they started fighting in front of other guests; and they flew back.
The final topper was the racetrack. Remi saved all his money, about a hundred dollars, spruced me
up in some of his clothes, put Lee Ann on his arm, and off we went to Golden Gate racetrack near
Richmond across the bay. To show you what a heart that guy had, he put half of our stolen groceries
in a tremendous brown paper bag and took them to a poor widow he knew in Richmond in a
housing project much like our own, wash flapping in the California sun. We went with him. There
were sad ragged children. The woman thanked Remi. She was the sister of some seaman he
vaguely knew. "Think nothing of it, Mrs. Carter," said Remi in his most elegant and polite tones.
"There's plenty more where that came from." 
We proceeded to the racetrack. He made incredible twenty-dollar bets to win, and before the
seventh race he was broke. With our last two food dollars he placed still another bet and lost. We
had to hitchhike back to San Francisco. I was on the road again. A gentleman gave us a ride in his
snazzy car. I sat up front with him. Remi was trying to put a story down that he'd lost his wallet in
back of the grandstand at the track. "The truth is," I said, "we lost all our money on the races, and to
forestall any more hitching from racetracks, from now on we go to a bookie, hey, Remi?" Remi
blushed all over. The man finally admitted he was an official of the Golden Gate track. He let us off
at the elegant Palace Hotel; we watched him disappear among the chandeliers, his pockets full of
money, his head held high.
"Wagh! Whoo!" howled Remi in the evening streets of Frisco. "Paradise rides with the man who
runs the racetrack and swears he's switching to bookies. Lee Ann, Lee Ann!" He punched and
mauled her. "Positively the funniest man in the world! There must be a lot of Italians in Sausalito.
Aaah-how!" He wrapped himself around a pole to laugh.
That night it started raining as Lee Ann gave dirty looks to both of us. Not a cent left in the house.
The rain drummed on the roof. "It's going to last for a week," said Remi. He had taken off his
beautiful suit; he was back in his miserable shorts and Army cap and T-shirt. His great brown sad
eyes stared at the planks of the floor. The gun lay on the table. We could hear Mr. Snow laughing
his head off across the rainy night somewhere.
"I get so sick and tired of that sonofabitch," snapped Lee Ann. She was on the go to start trouble.
She began needling Remi. He was busy going through his little black book, in which were names of
people, mostly seamen, who owed him money. Beside their names he wrote curses in red ink. I
dreaded the day I'd ever find my way into that book. Lately I'd been sending so much money to my
aunt that I only bought four or five dollars' worth of groceries a week. In keeping with what
President Truman said, I added a few more dollars' worth. But Remi felt it wasn't my proper share;
so he'd taken to hanging the grocery slips, the long ribbon slips with itemized prices, on the wall of
the bathroom for me to see and understand. Lee Ann was convinced Remi was hiding money from
her, and that I was too, for that matter. She threatened to leave him.
Remi curled his lip. "Where do you think you'll go?"
"Jimmy."
"Jimmy? A cashier at the racetrack? Do you hear that, Sal, Lee Ann is going to go and put the latch
on a cashier at the racetrack. Be sure and bring your broom, dear, the horses are going to eat a lot of
oats this week with my hundred-dollar bill."
Things grew to worse proportions; the rain roared. Lee Ann originally lived in the place first, so she
told Remi to pack up and get out. He started packing. I pictured myself all alone in this rainy shack
with that untamed shrew. I tried to intervene. Remi pushed Lee Ann. She made a jump for the gun.
Remi gave me the gun and told me to hide it; there was a clip of eight shells in it. Lee Ann began 
screaming, and finally she put on her raincoat and went out in the mud to find a cop, and what a
cop-if it wasn't our old friend Alcatraz. Luckily he wasn't home. She came back all wet. I hid in my
corner with my head between my knees. Gad, what was I doing three thousand miles from home?
Why had I come here? Where was my slow boat to China?
"And another thing, you dirty man," yelled Lee Ann. "Tonight was the last time I'll ever make you
your filthy brains and eggs, and your filthy Iamb curry, so you can fill your filthy belly and get fat
and sassy right before my eyes."
 "It's all right," Remi just said quietly. "It's perfectly all right. When I took up with you I didn't
expect roses and moonshine and I'm not surprised this day. I tried to do a few things for you-I tried
my best for both of you; you've both let me down. I'm terribly, terribly disappointed in both of
you," he continued in absolute sincerity. "I thought something would come of us together,
something fine and lasting, I tried, I flew to Hollywood, I got Sal a job, I bought you beautiful
dresses, I tried to introduce you to the finest people in San Francisco. You refused, you both refused
to follow the slightest wish I had. I asked for nothing in return. Now I ask for one last favor and
then I'll never ask a favor again. My stepfather is coming to San Francisco next Saturday night. All
I ask is that you come with me and try to look as though everything is the way I've written him. In
other words, you, Lee Ann, you are my girl, and you, Sal, you are my friend. I've arranged to
borrow a hundred dollars for Saturday night. I'm going to see that my father has a good time and
can go away without any reason in the world to worry about me."
This surprised me. Remi's stepfather was a distinguished doctor who had practiced in Vienna, Paris,
and London. I said, "You mean to tell me you're going to spend a hundred dollars on your
stepfather? He's got more money than you'll ever have! You'll be in debt, man!"
"That's all right," said Remi quietly and with defeat in his voice. "I ask only one last thing of
you-that you try at least to make things look all right and try to make a good impression. I love my
stepfather and I respect him. He's coming with his young wife. We must show him every courtesy."
There were times when Remi was really the most gentlemanly person in the world. Lee Ann was
impressed, and looked forward to meeting his stepfather; she thought he might be a catch, if his son
wasn't.
Saturday night rolled around. I had already quit my job with the cops, just before being fired for not
making enough arrests, and this was going to be my last Saturday night. Remi and Lee Ann went to
meet his stepfather at the hotel room first; I had traveling money and got crocked in the bar
downstairs. Then I went up to join them all, late as hell. His father opened the door, a distinguished
tall man in pince-nez. "Ah," I said on seeing him, "Monsieur Boncoeur, how are you? Je suis haut!"
I cried, which was intended to mean in French, "I am high, I have been drinking," but means
absolutely nothing in French. The doctor was perplexed. I had already screwed up Remi. He
blushed at me. 
We all went to a swank restaurant to eat-Alfred's, in North Beach, where poor Remi spent a good
fifty dollars for the five of us, drinks and all. And now came the worst thing. Who should be sitting
at the bar in Alfred's but my old friend Roland Major! He had just arrived from Denver and got a
job on a San Francisco paper. He was crocked. He wasn't even shaved. He rushed over and slapped
me on the back as I lifted a highball to my lips. He threw himself down on the booth beside Dr.
Boncceur and leaned over the man's soup to talk to me. Remi was red as a beet.
"Won't you introduce your friend, Sal?" he said with a weak smile.
"Roland Major of the San Francisco Argus," I tried to say with a straight face. Lee Ann was furious
at me.
Major began chatting in the monsieur's ear. "How do you like teaching high-school French?" he
yelled. "Pardon me, but I don't teach high-school French." "Oh, I thought you taught high-school
French." He was being deliberately rude. I remembered the night he wouldn't let us have our party
in Denver; but I forgave him.
I forgave everybody, I gave up, I got drunk. I began talking moonshine and roses to the doctor's
young wife. I drank so much I had to go to the men's room every two minutes, and to do so I had to
hop over Dr. Boncceur's lap. Everything was falling apart. My stay in San Francisco was coming to
an end. Remi would never talk to me again. It was horrible because I really loved Remi and I was
one of the very few people in the world who knew what a genuine and grand fellow he was. It
would take years for him to get over it. How disastrous all this was compared to what I'd written
him from Paterson, planning my red line Route 6 across America. Here I was at the end of
America-no more land-and now there was nowhere to go but back. I determined at least to make
my trip a circular one: I decided then and there to go to Hollywood and back through Texas to see
my bayou gang; then the rest be damned.
Major was thrown out of Alfred's. Dinner was over anyway, so I joined him; that is to say, Remi
suggested it, and I went off with Major to drink. We sat at a table in the Iron Pot and Major said,
"Sam, I don't like that fairy at the bar," in a loud voice.
"Yeah, Jake?" I said.
"Sam," he said, "I think I'll get up and conk him." "No, Jake," I said, carrying on with the
Hemingway imitation. "Just aim from here and see what happens." We ended up swaying on a
street corner.
In the morning, as Remi and Lee Ann slept, and as I looked with some sadness at the big pile of
wash Remi and I were scheduled to do in the Bendix machine in the shack in the back (which had
always been such a joyous sunny operation among the colored women and with Mr. Snow laughing
his head off), I decided to leave. I went out on the porch. "No, dammit," I said to myself, "I
promised I wouldn't leave till I climbed that mountain." That was the big side of the canyon that led
mysteriously to the Pacific Ocean. 
So I stayed another day. It was Sunday. A great heat wave descended; it was a beautiful day, the sun
turned red at three. I started up the mountain and got to the top at four. All those lovely California
cottonwoods and eucalypti brooded on all sides. Near the peak there were no more trees, just rocks
and grass. Cattle were grazing on the top of the coast. There was the Pacific, a few more foothills
away, blue and vast and with a great wall of white advancing from the legendary potato patch
where Frisco fogs are born. Another hour and it would come streaming through the Golden Gate to
shroud the romantic city in white, and a young man would hold his girl by the hand and climb
slowly up a long white sidewalk with a bottle of Tokay in his pocket. That was Frisco; and beautiful
women standing in white doorways, waiting for their men; and Coit Tower, and the Embarcadero,
and Market Street, and the eleven teeming hills.
I spun around till I was dizzy; I thought I'd fall down as in a dream, clear off the precipice. Oh
where is the girl I love? I thought, and looked everywhere, as I had looked everywhere in the little
world below. And before me was the great raw bulge and bulk of my American continent;
somewhere far across, gloomy, crazy New York was throwing up its cloud of dust and brown steam.
There is something brown and holy about the East; and California is white like washlines and
emptyheaded-at least that's what I thought then.
12
In the morning Remi and Lee Ann were asleep as I quietly packed and slipped out the window the
same way I'd come in, and left Mill City with my canvas bag. And I never spent that night on the
old ghost ship-the Admiral Freebee, it was called-and Remi and I were lost to each other.
In Oakland I had a beer among the bums of a saloon with a wagon wheel in front of it, and I was on
the road again. I walked clear across Oakland to get on the Fresno road. Two rides took me to
Bakersfield, four hundred miles south. The first was the mad one, with a burly blond kid in a
souped-up rod. "See that toe?" he said as he gunned the heap to eighty and passed everybody on the
road. "Look at it." It was swathed in bandages. "I just had it amputated this morning. The bastards
wanted me to stay in the hospital. I packed my bag and left. What's a toe?" Yes, indeed, I said to
myself, look out now, and I hung on. You never saw a driving fool like that. He made Tracy in no
time. Tracy is a railroad town; brakemen eat surly meals in diners by the tracks. Trains howl away
across the valley. The sun goes down long and red. All the magic names of the valley
unrolled-Manteca, Madera, all the rest. Soon it got dusk, a grapy dusk, a purple dusk over tangerine
groves and long melon fields; the sun the color of pressed grapes, slashed with burgundy red, the
fields the color of love and Spanish mysteries. I stuck my head out the window and took deep
breaths of the fragrant air. It was the most beautiful of all moments. The madman was a brakeman
with the Southern Pacific and he lived in Fresno; his father was also a brakeman. He lost his toe in
the Oakland yards, switching, I didn't quite understand how. He drove me into buzzing Fresno and 
let me off by the south side of town. I went for a quick Coke in a little grocery by the tracks, and
here came a melancholy Armenian youth along the red boxcars, and just at that moment a
locomotive howled, and I said to myself, Yes, yes, Saroyan's town.
I had to go south; I got on the road. A man in a brand-new pickup truck picked me up. He was from
Lubbock, Texas, and was in the trailer business. "You want to buy a trailer?" he asked me. "Any
time, look me up." He told stories about his father in Lubbock. "One night my old man left the
day's receipts settin on top of the safe, plumb forgot. What happened -a thief came in the night,
acetylene torch and all, broke open the safe, riffled up the papers, kicked over a few chairs, and left.
And that thousand dollars was settin right there on top of the safe, what do you know about that?"
He let me off south of Bakersfield, and then my adventure began. It grew cold. I put on the flimsy
Army raincoat I'd bought in Oakland for three dollars and shuddered in the road. I was standing in
front of an ornate Spanish-style motel that was lit like a jewel. The cars rushed by, LA-bound. I
gestured frantically. It was too cold. I stood there till midnight, two hours straight, and cursed and
cursed. It was just like Stuart, Iowa, again. There was nothing to do but spend a little over two
dollars for a bus the remaining miles to Los Angeles. I walked back along the highway to
Bakersfield and into the station, and sat down on a bench.
I had bought my ticket and was waiting for the LA bus when all of a sudden I saw the cutest little
Mexican girl in slacks come cutting across my sight. She was in one of the buses that had just
pulled in with a big sigh of airbrakes; it was discharging passengers for a rest stop. Her breasts
stuck out straight and true; her little flanks looked delicious; her hair was long and lustrous black;
and her eyes were great big blue things with timidities inside. I wished I was on her bus. A pain
stabbed my heart, as it did every time I saw a girl I loved who was going the opposite direction in
this too-big world. The announcer called the LA bus. I picked up my bag and got on, and who
should be sitting there alone but the Mexican girl. I dropped right opposite her and began scheming
right off. I was so lonely, so sad, so tired, so quivering, so broken, so beat, that I got up my courage,
the courage necessary to approach a strange girl, and acted. Even then I spent five minutes beating
my thighs in the dark as the bus rolled down the road.
You gotta, you gotta or you'll die! Damn fool, talk to her! What's wrong with you? Aren't you tired
enough of yourself by now? And before I knew what I was doing I leaned across the aisle to her
(she was trying to sleep on the seat) and said, "Miss, would you like to use my raincoat for a
pillow?"
She looked up with a smile and said, "No, thank you very much."
I sat back, trembling; I lit a butt. I waited till she looked at me, with a sad little sidelook of love,
and I got right up and leaned over her. "May I sit with you, miss?"
"If you wish."
And this I did. "Where going?" 
"LA." I loved the way she said "LA"; I love the way everybody says "LA" on the Coast; it's their
one and only golden town when all is said and done,
"That's where I'm going too!" I cried. "I'm very glad you let me sit with you, I was very lonely and
I've been traveling a hell of a lot." And we settled down to telling our stories. Her story was this:
She had a husband and child. The husband beat her, so she left him, back at Sabinal, south of
Fresno, and was going to LA to live with her sister awhile. She left her little son with her family,
who were grape-pickers and lived in a shack in the vineyards. She had nothing to do but brood and
get mad. I felt like putting my arms around her right away. We talked and talked. She said she loved
to talk with me. Pretty soon she was saying she wished she could go to New York too. "Maybe we
could!" I laughed. The bus groaned up Grapevine Pass and then we were coming down into the
great sprawls of light. Without coming to any particular agreement we began holding hands, and in
the same way it was mutely and beautifully and purely decided that when I got my hotel room in
LA she would be beside me. I ached all over for her; I leaned my head in her beautiful hair. Her
little shoulders drove me mad; I hugged her and hugged her. And she loved it.
"I love love," she said, closing her eyes. I promised her beautiful love. I gloated over her. Our
stories were told; we subsided into silence and sweet anticipatory thoughts. It was as simple as that.
You could have all your Peaches and Bettys and Marylous and Ritas and Camilles and Inezes in
this world; this was my girl and my kind of girlsoul, and I told her that. She confessed she saw me
watching her in the bus station. "I thought you was a nice college boy."
"Oh, I'm a college boy!" I assured her. The bus arrived in Hollywood. In the gray, dirty dawn, like
the dawn when Joel McCrea met Veronica Lake in a diner, in the picture Sullivan's Travels, she
slept in my lap. I looked greedily out tine window: stucco houses and palms and drive-ins, the
whole mad thing, the ragged promised land, the fantastic end of America. We got off the bus at
Main Street, which was no different from where you get off a bus in Kansas City or Chicago or
Boston-red brick, dirty, characters drifting by, trolleys grating in the hopeless dawn, the whorey
smell of a big city.
And here my mind went haywire, I don't know why. I began getting the foolish paranoiac visions
that Teresa, or Terry-her name-was a common little hustler who worked the buses for a guy's bucks
by making appointments like ours in LA where she brought the sucker first to a breakfast place,
where her pimp waited, and then to a certain hotel to which he had access with his gun or his
whatever. I never confessed this to her. We ate breakfast and a pimp kept watching us; I fancied
Terry was making secret eyes at him. I was tired and felt strange and lost in a faraway, disgusting
place. The goof of terror took over my thoughts and made me act petty and cheap. "Do you know
that guy?" I said.
"What guy you mean, honey?" I let it drop. She was slow and hung-up about everything she did; it
took her a long time to eat; she chewed slowly and stared into space, and smoked a cigarette, and 
kept talking, and I was like a haggard ghost, suspicioning every move she made, thinking she was
stalling for time. This was all a fit of sickness. I was sweating as we went down the street hand in
hand. The first hotel we hit had a room, and before I knew it I was locking the door behind me and
she was sitting on the bed taking off her shoes. I kissed her meekly. Better she'd never know. To
relax our nerves I knew we needed whisky, especially me. I ran out and fiddled all over twelve
blocks, hurrying till I found a pint of whisky for sale at a newsstand. I ran back, all energy. Terry
was in the bathroom, fixing her face. I poured one big drink in a water glass, and we had slugs. Oh,
it was sweet and delicious and worth my whole lugubrious voyage. I stood behind her at the mirror,
and we danced in the bathroom that way. I began talking about my friends back east.
I said, "You ought to meet a great girl I know called Doric. She's a six-foot redhead. If you came to
New York she'd show you where to get work."
"Who is this six-foot redhead?" she demanded suspiciously. "Why do you tell me about her?" In her
simple soul she couldn't fathom my kind of glad, nervous talk. I let it drop. She began to get drunk
in the bathroom.
"Come on to bed!" I kept saying.
"Six-foot redhead, hey? And I thought you was a nice college boy, I saw you in your lovely sweater
and I said to myself, Hmm, ain't he nice? No! And no! And no! You have to be a goddam pimp like
all of them!"
"What on earth are you talking about?"
"Don't stand there and tell me that six-foot redhead ain't a madame, 'cause I know a madame when I
hear about one, and you, you're just a pimp like all the rest I meet, everybody's a pimp."
"Listen, Terry, I am not a pimp. I swear to you on the Bible I am not a pimp. Why should I be a
pimp? My only interest is you."
"All the time I thought I met a nice boy. I was so glad, I hugged myself and said, Hmm, a real nice
boy instead of a pimp."
"Terry," I pleaded with all my soul. "Please listen to me and understand, I'm not a pimp." An hour
ago I'd thought she was a hustler. How sad it was. Our minds, with their store of madness, had
diverged. O gruesome life, how I moaned and pleaded, and then I got mad and realized I was
pleading with a dumb little Mexican wench and I told her so; and before I knew it I picked up her
red pumps and hurled them at the bathroom door and told her to get out. "Go on, beat it!" I'd sleep
and forget it; I had my own life, my own sad and ragged life forever. There was a dead silence in
the bathroom. I took my clothes off and went to bed.
Terry came out with tears of sorriness in her eyes. In her simple and funny little mind had been
decided the fact that a pimp does not throw a woman's shoes against the door and does not tell her
to get out. In reverent and sweet little silence she took all her clothes off and slipped her tiny body
into the sheets with me. It was brown as grapes. I saw her poor belly where there was a Caesarian 
scar; her hips were so narrow she couldn't bear a child without getting gashed open. Her legs were
like little sticks. She was only four foot ten. I made love to her in the sweetness of the weary
morning. Then, two tired angels of some kind, hung-up forlornly in an LA shelf, having found the
closest and most delicious thing in life together, we fell asleep and slept till late afternoon.
13
For the next fifteen days we were together for better or for worse. When we woke up we decided to
hitchhike to New York together; she was going to be my girl in town. I envisioned wild
complexities with Dean and Marylou and everybody-a season, a new season. First we had to work
to earn enough money for the trip. Terry was all for starting at once with the twenty dollars I had
left. I didn't like it. And, like a damn fool, I considered the problem for two days, as we read the
want ads of wild LA papers I'd never seen before in my life, in cafeterias and bars, until my twenty
dwindled to just over ten. We were very happy in our little hotel room. In the middle of the night I
got up because I couldn't sleep, pulled the cover over baby's bare brown shoulder, and examined the
LA night. What brutal, hot, siren-whining nights they are! Right across the street there was trouble.
An old rickety rundown rooming house was the scene of some kind of tragedy. The cruiser was
pulled up below and the cops were questioning an old man with gray hair. Sobbings came from
within. I could hear everything, together with the hum of my hotel neon. I never felt sadder in my
life. LA is the loneliest and most brutal of American cities; New York gets god-awful cold in the
winter but there's a feeling of wacky comradeship somewhere in some streets. LA is a jungle.
South Main Street, where Terry and I took strolls with hot dogs, was a fantastic carnival of lights
and wildness. Booted cops frisked people on practically every corner. The beatest characters in the
country swarmed on the sidewalks -all of it under those soft Southern California stars that are lost
in the brown halo of the huge desert encampment LA really is. You could smell tea, weed, I mean
marijuana, floating in the air, together with the chili beans and beer. That grand wild sound of bop
floated from beer parlors; it mixed medleys with every kind of cowboy and boogie-woogie in the
American night. Everybody looked like Hassel. Wild Negroes with bop caps and goatees came
laughing by; then long-haired brokendown hipsters straight off Route 66 from New York; then old
desert rats, carrying packs and heading for a park bench at the Plaza; then Methodist ministers with
raveled sleeves, and an occasional Nature Boy saint in beard and sandals. I wanted to meet them all,
talk to everybody, but Terry and I were too busy trying to get a buck together.
We went to Hollywood to try to work in the drugstore at Sunset and Vine. Now there was a corner!
Great families off jalopies from the hinterlands stood around the sidewalk gaping for sight of some
movie star, and the movie star never showed up. When a limousine passed they rushed eagerly to
the curb and ducked to look: some character in dark glasses sat inside with a bejeweled blonde.
"Don Ameche! Don Ameche!" "No, George Murphy! George Murphy!" They milled around, 
looking at one another. Handsome queer boys who had come to Hollywood to be cowboys walked
around, wetting their eyebrows with hincty fingertip. The most beautiful little gone gals in the
world cut by in slacks; they came to be starlets; they ended up in drive-ins. Terry and I tried to find
work at the drive-ins. It was no soap anywhere. Hollywood Boulevard was a great, screaming
frenzy of cars; there were minor accidents at least once a minute; everybody was rushing off toward
the farthest palm-and beyond that was the desert and nothingness. Hollywood Sams stood in front
of swank restaurants, arguing exactly the same way Broadway Sams argue at Jacob's Beach, New
York, only here they wore light-weight suits and their talk was cornier. Tall, cadaverous preachers
shuddered by. Fat screaming women ran across the boulevard to get in line for the quiz shows. I
saw Jerry Colonna buying a car at Buick Motors; he was inside the vast plate-glass window,
fingering his mustachio. Terry and I ate in a cafeteria downtown which was decorated to look like
a grotto, with metal .... spurting everywhere and great impersonal stone buttockses belonging
to deities and soapy Neptune. People ate lugubrious meals around the waterfalls, their faces
green with marine sorrow. All the cops in LA looked like handsome gigolos; obviously they'd
come to LA to make the movies. Everybody had come to make the movies, even me. Terry and I
were finally reduced to trying to get jobs on South Main Street among the beat countermen and
made no bones about their beatness, and even there it was no go. We still had ten dollars. dishgirls who
"Man, I'm going to get my clothes from Sis and we'll hitchhike to New York," said Terry. "Come on,
man. Let's do it. 'If you can't boogie I know I'll show you how.'" That last part was a song of hers
she kept singing. We hurried to her sister's house in the sliverous Mexican shacks somewhere
beyond Alameda Avenue. I waited in a dark alley behind Mexican kitchens because her sister
wasn't supposed to see me. Dogs ran by. There were little lamps illuminating the little rat alleys. I
could hear Terry and her sister arguing in the soft, warm night. I was ready for anything.
Terry came out and led me by the hand to Central Avenue, which is the colored main drag of LA.
And what a wild place it is, with chickenshacks barely big enough to house a jukebox, and the
jukebox blowing nothing but blues, bop, and jump. We went up dirty tenement stairs and came to
the room of Terry's friend Margarina, who owed Terry a skirt and a pair of shoes. Margarina was a
lovely mulatto; her husband was black as spades and kindly. He went right out and bought a pint of
whisky to host me proper. I tried to pay part of it, but he said no. They had two little children. The
kids bounced on the bed; it was their play-place. They put their arms around me and looked at me
with wonder. The wild humming night of Central Avenue-the night of Hamp's "Central Avenue
Breakdown"-howled and boomed along outside. They were singing in the halls, singing from their
windows, just hell be damned and look out. Terry got her clothes and we said good-by. We went
down to a chickenshack and played records on the jukebox. A couple of Negro characters
whispered in my ear about tea. One buck. I said okay, bring it. The connection came in and
motioned me to the cellar toilet, where I stood around dumbly as he said, "Pick up, man, pick up." 
"Pick up what?" I said.
He had my dollar already. He was afraid to point at the floor. It was no floor, just basement. There
lay something that looked like a little brown turd. He was absurdly cautious. "Got to look out for
myself, things ain't cool this past week." I picked up the turd, which was a brown-paper cigarette,
and went back to Terry, and off we went to the hotel room to get high. Nothing happened. It was
Bull Durham tobacco. I wished I was wiser with my money.
Terry and I had to decide absolutely and once and for all what to do. We decided to hitch to New
York with our remaining money. She picked up five dollars from her sister that night. We had about
thirteen or less. So before the daily room rent was due again we packed up and took off on a red car
to Arcadia, California, where Santa Anita racetrack is located under snow-capped mountains. It was
night. We were pointed toward the American continent. Holding hands, we walked several miles
down the road to get out of the populated district. It was a Saturday night. We stood under a
roadlamp, thumbing, when suddenly cars full of young kids roared by with streamers flying. "Yaah!
Yaah! we won! we won!" they all shouted. Then they yoohooed us and got great glee out of seeing
a guy and a girl on the road. Dozens of such cars passed, full of young faces and "throaty young
voices," as the saying goes. I hated every one of them. Who did they think they were, yaahing at
somebody on the road just because they were little high-school punks and their parents carved the
roast beef on Sunday afternoons? Who did they think they were, making fun of a girl reduced to
poor circumstances with a man who wanted to belove? We were minding our own business. And
we didn't get a blessed ride.
We had to walk back to town, and worst of all we needed coffee and had the misfortune of going
into the only place open, which was a high-school soda fountain, and all the kids were there and
remembered us. Now they saw that Terry was Mexican, a Pachuco wildcat; and that her boy was
worse than that.
With her pretty nose in the air she cut out of there and we wandered together in the dark up along
the ditches of the highways. I carried the bags. We were breathing fogs in the cold night air. I
finally decided to hide from the world one more night with her, and the morning be damned. We
went into a motel court and bought a comfortable little suite for about four dollars-shower,
bathtowels, wall radio, and all. We held each other tight. We had long, serious talks and took baths
and discussed things with the light on and then with the light out. Something was being proved, I
was convincing her of something, which she accepted, and we concluded the pact in the dark,
breathless, then pleased, like little lambs.
In the morning we boldly struck out on our new plan. We were going to take a bus to Bakersfield
and work picking grapes. After a few weeks of that we were headed for New York in the proper
way, by bus. It was a wonderful afternoon, riding up to Bakersfield with Terry: we sat back, relaxed,
talked, saw the countryside roll by, and didn't worry about a thing. We arrived in Bakersfield in late 
afternoon. The plan was to hit every fruit wholesaler in town. Terry said we could live in tents on
the job. The thought of living in a tent and picking grapes in the cool California mornings hit me
right. But there were no jobs to be had, and much confusion, with everybody giving us innumerable
tips, and no job materialized. Nevertheless we ate a Chinese dinner and set out with reinforced
bodies. We went across the SP tracks to Mexican town. Terry jabbered with her brethren, asking for
jobs. It was night now, and the little Mextown street was one blazing bulb of lights: movie
marquees, fruit stands, penny arcades, five-and-tens, and hundreds of rickety trucks and
mud-spattered jalopies, parked. Whole Mexican fruit-picking families wandered around eating
popcorn. Terry talked to everybody. I was beginning to despair. What I needed - what Terry needed,
too - was a drink, so we bought a quart of California port for thirty-five cents and went to the
railroad yards to drink. We found a place where hobos had drawn up crates to sit over fires. We sat
there and drank the wine. On our left were the freight cars, sad and sooty red beneath the moon;
straight ahead the lights and airport pokers of Bakersfield proper; to our right a tremendous
aluminum Quonset warehouse. Ah, it was a fine night, a warm night, a wine-drinking night, a
moony night, and a night to hug your girl and talk and spit and be heavengoing. This we did. She
was a drinking little fool and kept up with me and passed me and went right on talking till midnight.
We never budged from those crates. Occasionally bums passed, Mexican mothers passed with
children, and the prowl car came by and the cop got out to leak, but most of the time we were alone
and mixing up our souls ever more and ever more till it would be terribly hard to say good-by. At
midnight we got up and goofed toward the highway.
Terry had a new idea. We would hitchhike to Sabinal, her hometown, and live in her brother's
garage. Anything was all right with me. On the road I made Terry sit down on my bag to make her
look like a woman in distress, and right off a truck stopped and we ran for it, all glee-giggles. The
man was a good man; his truck was poor. He roared and crawled on up the valley. We got to
Sabinal in the wee hours before dawn. I had finished the wine while Terry slept, and I was proper
stoned. We got out and roamed the quiet leafy square 'of the little California town - a whistle stop
on the SP. We went to find her brother's buddy, who would tell us where he was. Nobody home. As
dawn began to break I lay flat on my back in the lawn of the town square and kept saying over and
over again, "You won't tell what he done up in Weed, will you? What'd he do up in Weed? You
won't tell will you? What'd he do up in Weed?" This was from the picture Of Mice and Men, with
Burgess Meredith talking to the foreman of the ranch. Terry giggled. Anything I did was all right
with her. I could lie there and go on doing that till the ladies came out for church and she wouldn't
care. But finally I decided we'd be all set soon because of her brother, and I took her to an old hotel
by the tracks and we went to bed comfortably.
In the bright, sunny morning Terry got up early and went to find her brother. I slept till noon; when
I looked out the window I suddenly saw an SP freight going by with hundreds of hobos reclining on 
the flatcars and rolling merrily along with packs for pillows and funny papers before their noses,
and some munching on good California grapes pickfed up by the siding. "Damn!" I yelled. "Hooee!
It is the promised land." They were all coming from Frisco; in a week they'd all be going back in
the same grand style.
Terry arrived with her brother, his buddy, and her child. Her brother was a wild-buck Mexican
hotcat with a hunger for booze, a great good kid. His buddy was a big flabby Mexican who spoke
English without much accent and was loud and overanxious to please. I could see he had eyes for
Terry. Her little boy was Johnny, seven years old, dark-eyed and sweet. Well, there we were, and
another wild day began.
Her brother's name was Rickey. He had a '38 Chevy. We piled into that and took off for parts
unknown. "Where we going?" I asked. The buddy did the explaining-his name was Ponzo, that's
what everybody called him. He stank. I found out why. His business was selling manure to farmers;
he had a truck. Rickey always had three or four dollars in his pocket and was happy-go-lucky about
things. He always said, "That's right, man, there you go-dah you go, dah you go!" And he went. He
drove seventy miles an hour in the old heap, and we went to Madera beyond Fresno to see some
farmers about manure.
Rickey had a bottle. "Today we drink, tomorrow we work. Dah you go, man-take a shot!" Terry sat
in back with her baby; I looked back at her and saw the flush of homecoming joy on her face. The
beautiful green countryside of October in California reeled by madly. I was guts and juice again
and ready to go. "Where do we go now, man?"
"We go find a farmer with some manure laying around. Tomorrow we drive back in the truck and
pick it up. Man, we'll make a lot of money. Don't worry about nothing."
"We're all in this together!" yelled Ponzo. I saw that was so-everywhere I went, everybody was in it
together. We raced through the crazy streets of Fresno and on up the valley to some farmers in back
roads. Ponzo got out of the car and conducted confused conversations with old Mexican farmers;
nothing, of course, came of it.
"What we need is a drink!" yelled Rickey, and off we went to a crossroads saloon. Americans are
always drinking in crossroads saloons on Sunday afternoon; they bring their kids; they gabble and
brawl over brews; everything's fine. Come nightfall the kids start crying and the parents are drunk.
They go weaving back to the house. Everywhere in America I've been in crossroads saloons
drinking with  whole families. The kids eat popcorn and chips and play in back. This we did.
Rickey and I and Ponzo and Terry sat drinking and shouting with the music; little baby Johnny
goofed with other childen around the jukebox. The sun began to get red. Nothing had been
accomplished. What was there to accomplish? "Mariana" said Rickey. "Manana, man, we make it;
have another beer, man, dah you go, dab you go!"
We staggered out and got in the car; off we went to a highway bar. Ponzo was a big, loud, 
vociferous type who knew everybody in San Joaquin Valley. From the highway bar I went with him
alone in the car to find a farmer; instead we wound up in Madera Mextown, digging the girls and
trying to pick up a few for him and Rickey. And then, as purple dusk descended over the grape
country, I found myself sitting dumbly in the car as he argued with some old Mexican at the kitchen
door about the price of a watermelon the old man grew in the back yard. We got the watermelon;
we ate it on the spot and threw the rinds on the old man's dirt sidewalk. All kinds of pretty little
girls were cutting down the darkening street. I said, "Where in the hell are we?"
"Don't worry, man," said big Ponzo. "Tomorrow we make a lot of money; tonight we don't worry."
We went back and picked up Terry and her brother and the kid and drove to Fresno in the highway
lights of night. We were all raving hungry. We bounced over the railroad tracks in Fresno and hit
the wild streets of Fresno Mextown. Strange Chinese hung out of windows, digging the Sunday
night streets; groups of Mex chicks swaggered around in slacks; mambo blasted from jukeboxes;
the lights were festooned around like Halloween. We went into a Mexican restaurant and had tacos
and mashed pinto beans rolled in tortillas; it was delicious. I whipped out my last shining
five-dollar bill which stood between me and the New Jersey shore and paid for Terry and me. Now
I had four bucks. Terry and I looked at each other.
"Where we going to sleep tonight, baby?"
"I don't know."
Rickey was drunk; now all he was saying was, "Dah you go, man-dah you go, man," in a tender
and tired voice. It had been a long day. None of us knew what was going on, or what the Good Lord
appointed. Poor little Johnny fell asleep on my arm. We drove back to Sabinal. On the way we
pulled up sharp at a roadhouse on Highway 99. Rickey wanted one last beer. In back of the
roadhouse were trailers and tents and a few rickety motel-style rooms. I inquired about the price
and it was two bucks. I asked Terry how about it, and she said fine because we had the kid on our
hands now and had to make him comfortable. So after a few beers in the saloon, where sullen Okies
reeled to the music of a cowboy band, Terry and I and Johnny went into a motel room and got ready
to hit the sack. Ponzo kept hanging around; he had no place to sleep. Rickey slept at his father's
house in the vineyard shack.
"Where do you live, Ponzo?" I asked.
"Nowhere, man. I'm supposed to live with Big Rosey but she threw me out last night. I'm gonna get
my truck and sleep in it tonight." Guitars tinkled. Terry and I gazed at the stars together and kissed.
"Manana" she said. "Everything'll be all right tomorrow, don't you think, Sal-honey, man?"
"Sure, baby, manana." It was always manana. For the next week that was all I heard-manana, a
lovely word and one that probably means heaven.
Little Johnny jumped in bed, clothes and all, and went to sleep; sand spilled out of his shoes,
Madera sand. Terry and I got up in the middle of the night and brushed the sand off the sheets. In 
the morning I got up, washed, and took a walk around the place. We were five miles out of Sabinal
in the cotton fields and grape vineyards. I asked the big fat woman who owned the camp if any of
the tents were vacant. The cheapest one, a dollar a day, was vacant. I fished up a dollar and moved
into it. There were a bed, a stove, and a cracked mirror hanging from a pole; it was delightful. I had
to stoop to get in, and when I did there was my baby and my baby boy. We waited for Rickey and
Ponzo to arrive with the truck. They arrived with beer bottles and started to get drunk in the tent.
"How about the manure?"
"Too late today. Tomorrow, man, we make a lot of money; today we have a few beers. What do you
say, beer?" I didn't have to be prodded. "Dah you go-dah you go!" yelled Rickey. I began to see that
our plans for making money with the manure truck would never materialize. The truck was parked
outside the tent. It smellcd like Ponzo.
That night Terry and I went to bed in the sweet night air beneath our dewy tent. I was just getting
ready to go to sleep when she said, "You want to love me now?"
I said, "What about Johnny?"
"He don't mind. He's asleep." But Johnny wasn't asleep and he said nothing.
The boys came back the next day with the manure truck and drove off to find whisky; they came
back and had a big time in the tent. That night Ponzo said it was too cold and slept on the ground in
our tent, wrapped in a big tarpaulin smelling of cowflaps. Terry hated him; she said he hung around
with her brother in order to get close to her.
Nothing was going to happen except starvation for Terry and me, so in the morning I walked
around the countryside asking for cotton-picking work. Everybody told me to go to the farm across
the highway from the camp. I went, and the farmer was in the kitchen with his women. He came
out, listened to my story, and warned me he was paying only three dollars per hundred pounds of
picked cotton. I pictured myself picking at least three hundred pounds a day and took the job. He
fished out some long canvas bags from the barn and told me the picking started at dawn. I rushed
back to Terry, all glee. On the way a grape truck went over a bump in the road and threw off great
bunches of grapes on the hot tar. I picked them up and took them home. Terry was glad. "Johnny
and me'll come with you and help."
"Pshaw!" I said. "No such thing!"
"You see, you see, it's very hard picking cotton. I show you how."
We ate the grapes, and in the evening Rickey showed up with a loaf of bread and a pound of
hamburg and we had a picnic. In a larger tent next to ours lived a whole family of Okie
cotton-pickers; the grandfather sat in a chair all day long, he was too old to work; the son and
daughter, and their children, filed every dawn across the highway to my farmer's field and went to
work. At dawn the next day I went with them. They said the cotton was heavier at dawn because of
the dew and you could make more money than in the afternoon. Nevertheless they worked all day 
from dawn to sundown. The grandfather had come from Nebraska during the great plague of the
thirties-that selfsame dustcloud my Montana cowboy had told me about-with the entire family in a
jalopy truck. They had been in California ever since. They loved to work. In the ten years the old
man's son had increased his children to the number of four, some of whom were old enough now to
pick cotton. And in that time they had progressed from ragged poverty in Simon Legree fields to a
kind of smiling respectability in better tents, and that Vas all. They were extremely proud of their
tent.
"Ever going back to Nebraska?"
"Pshaw, there's nothing back there. What we want to is buy a trailer."
We bent down and began picking cotton. It was beautiful. Across the field were the tents, and
beyond them the brown cottonfields that stretched out of sight to the brown arroyo foothills and
then the snow-capped Sierras in the morning air. This was so much better than washing dishes
South Main Street. But I knew nothing about picking cotton. I spent too much time disengaging the
white ball from crackly bed; the others did it in one flick. Moreover, fingertips began to bleed; I
needed gloves, or more expeience. There was an old Negro couple in the field with They picked
cotton with the same God-blessed patience the grandfathers had practiced in ante-bellum Alabama;
the moved right along their rows, bent and blue, and their bag increased. My back began to ache.
But it was beautiful kneeling and hiding in that earth. If I felt like resting I did, my face on the
pillow of brown moist earth. Birds an accompaniment. I thought I had found my life's work. Johnny
and Terry came waving at me across the field in hot lullal noon and pitched in with me. Be damned
if lit Johnny wasn't faster than I was!-and of course Terry twice as fast. They worked ahead of me
and left me piles clean cotton to add to my bag-Terry workmanlike pile Johnny little childly piles. I
stuck them in with sorrow. What kind of old man was I that couldn't support his ass, let alone
theirs? They spent all afternoon with me. Wt the sun got red we trudged back together. At the end
of field I unloaded my burden on a scale; it weighed fifty pound and I got a buck fifty. Then I
borrowed a bicycle from of the Okie boys and rode down 99 to a crossroads grocery store where I
bought cans of cooked spaghetti and meatballs, bread, butter, coffee, and cake, and came back with
the on the handlebars. LA-bound traffic zoomed by; Frisco-boy harassed my tail. I swore and swore.
I looked up at dark sky and prayed to God for a better break in life an better chance to do
something for the little people I love Nobody was paying any attention to me up there. I shot
known better. It was Terry who brought my soul back; on the tent stove she warmed up the food,
and it was one of the greatest meals of my life, I was so hungry and tired. Sighing like an old Negro
cotton-picker, I reclined on the bed and smoked a cigarette. Dogs barked in the cool night. Rickey
and Ponzo had given up calling in the evenings. I was satisfied with that. Terry curled up beside me,
Johnny sat on my chest, and they drew pictures of animals in my notebook. The light of our tent
burned on the frightful plain. The cowboy music twanged in the roadhouse and carried across the 
fields, all sadness. It was all right with me. I kissed my baby and we put out the lights.
In the morning the dew made the tent sag; I got up with my towel and toothbrush and went to the
general motel toilet to wash; then I came back, put on my pants, which were all torn from kneeling
in the earth and had been sewed by Terry in the evening, put on my ragged straw hat, which had
originally served as Johnny's toy hat, and went across the highway with my canvas cotton-bag.
Every day I earned approximately a dollar and a half. It was just enough to buy groceries in the
evening on the bicycle. The days rolled by. I forgot all about the East and all about Dean and Carlo
and the bloody road. Johnny and I played all the time; he liked me to throw him up in the air and
down in the bed. Terry sat mending clothes. I was a man of the earth, precisely as I had dreamed I
would be, in Paterson. There was talk that Terry's husband was back in Sabinal and out for me; I
was ready for him. One night the Okies went mad in the roadhouse and tied a man to a tree and beat
him to a pulp with sticks. I was asleep at the time and only heard about it. From then on I carried a
big stick with me in the tent in case they got the idea we Mexicans were fouling up their trailer
camp. They thought I was a Mexican, of course; and in a way I am.
But now it was October and getting much colder in the nights. The Okie family had a woodstove
and planned to stay for the winter. We had nothing, and besides the rent for the tent was due. Terry
and I bitterly decided we'd have to leave.
"Go back to your family," I said. "For God's sake, you can't be batting around tents with a baby like
Johnny; the poor little tyke is cold." Terry cried because I was criticizing her motherly instincts; I
meant no such thing. When Ponzo came in the truck one gray afternoon we decided to see her
family about the situation. But I mustn't be seen and would have to hide in the vineyard. We started
for Sabinal; the truck broke down, and simultaneously it started to rain wildly. We sat in the old
truck, cursing. Ponzo got out and toiled in the rain. He was a good old guy after all. We promised
each other one more big bat. Off we went to a rickety bar in Sabinal Mextown and spent an hour
sopping up the brew. I was through with my chores in the cottonfield. I could feel the pull of my
own life calling me back. I shot my aunt a penny postcard across the land and asked for another
fifty.
We drove to Terry's family's shack. It was situated on the old road that ran between the vineyards. It
was dark when we got there. They left me off a quarter-mile away and drove to the door. Light
poured out of the door; Terry's six other brothers were playing their guitars and singing. The old
man was drinking wine. I heard shouts and arguments above the singing. They called her a whore
because she'd left her no-good husband and gone to LA and left Johnny with them. The old man
was yelling. But the sad, fat brown mother prevailed, as she always does among the great fellahin
peoples of the world, and Terry was allowed to come back home. The brothers began to sing gay
songs, fast. I huddled in the cold, rainy wind and watched everything across the sad vineyards of
October in the valley. My mind was filled with that great song "Lover Man" as Billie Holiday sings 
it; I had my own concert in the bushes. "Someday we'll meet, and you'll dry all my tears, and
whisper sweet, little things in my ear, hugging and a-kissing, oh what we've been missing, Lover
Man, oh where can you be . . ." It's not the words so much as their great harmonic tune and the way
Billie sings it, like a woman stroking her man's hair in soft lamplight. The winds howled. I got I
cold.
Terry and Ponzo came back and we rattled off in the old truck to meet Rickey. Rickey was now
living with Ponzo's woman, Big Rosey; we tooted the horn for him in rickety alleys. Big Rosey
threw him out. Everything was collapsing. That night we slept in the truck. Terry held me tight, of
course, and told me not to leave. She said she'd work picking grapes and make enough money for
both of us; meanwhile I could live in Farmer Heffelfinger's barn down the road from her family. I'd
have nothing to do but sit in the grass all day and eat grapes. "You like that?"
In the morning her cousins came to get us in another truck. I suddenly realized thousands of
Mexicans all over the countryside knew about Terry and me and that it must have been a juicy,
romantic topic for them. The cousins were very polite and in fact charming. I stood on the truck,
smiling pleasantries, talking about where we were in the war and what the pitch was. There were
five cousins in all, and every one of them was nice. They seemed to belong to the side of Terry's
family that didn't fuss off like her brother. But I loved that wild Rickey. He swore he was coming to
New York to join me. I pictured him in New York, putting off everything till manana. He was drunk
in a field someplace that day.
I got off the truck at the crossroads, and the cousins drove Terry home. They gave me the high sign
from the front of the house; the father and mother weren't home, they were off picking grapes. So I
had the run of the house for the afternoon. It was a four-room shack; I couldn't imagine how the
whole family managed to live in there. Flies flew over the sink. There were no screens, just like in
the song, "The window she is broken and the rain she is coming in." Terry was at home now and
puttering around pots. Her two sisters giggled at me. The little children screamed in the road.
When the sun came out red through the clouds of my last valley afternoon, Terry led me to Farmer
Heffelfinger's barn. Farmer Heffelfinger had a prosperous farm up the road. We put crates together,
she brought blankets from the house, and I was all set except for a great hairy tarantula that lurked
at the pinpoint top of the barn roof. Terry said it wouldn't harm me if I didn't bother it. I lay on my
back and stared at it. I went out to the cemetery and climbed a tree. In the tree I sang "Blue Skies."
Terry and Johnny sat in the grass; we had grapes. In California you chew the juice out of grapes and
spit the skin away, a real luxury. Nightfall came. Terry went home for supper and came to the barn
at nine o'clock with delicious tortillas and mashed beans. I lit a woodfire on the cement floor of the
barn to make light. We made love on the crates. Terry got up and cut right back to the shack. Her
father was yelling at her.; I could hear him from the barn. She'd left me a cape to keep warm; I
threw it over my shoulder and skulked through the moonlit vineyard to see what was going on. I 
crept to the end of a row and knelt in the warm dirt. Her five brothers were singing melodious
songs in Spanish. The stars bent over the little roof; smoke poked from the stovepipe chimney. I
smelled mashed beans and chili. The old man growled. The brothers kept right on yodeling. The
mother was silent. Johnny and the kids were giggling in the bedroom. A California home; I hid in
the grapevines, digging it all. I felt like a million dollars; I was adventuring in the crazy American
night.
Terry came out, slamming the door behind her. I accosted her on the dark road. "What's the
matter?"
"Oh, we fight all the time. He wants me to go to work tomorrow. He says he don't want me foolin
around. Sallie, I want to go to New York with you."
"But how?"
"I don't know, honey. I'll miss you. I love you."
"But I have to leave."
"Yes, yes. We lay down one more time, then you leave." We went back to the barn; I made love to
her under the tarantula. What was the tarantula doing? We slept awhile on the crates as the fire died.
She went back at midnight; her father was drunk; I could hear him roaring; then there was silence
as he fell asleep. The stars folded over the sleeping countryside.
In the morning Farmer Heffelfinger stuck his head through the horse gate and said, "How you
doing, young fella?"
"Fine. I hope it's all right my staying here."
"Sure thing. You going with that little Mexican floozy?"
"She's a very nice girl."
"Very pretty too. I think the bull jumped the fence. She's got blue eyes." We talked about his farm.
Terry brought my breakfast. I had my canvas bag all packed and ready to go to New York, as soon
as I picked up my money in Sabinal. I knew it was waiting there for me by now. I told Terry I was
leaving. She had been thinking about it all night and was resigned to it. Emotionlessly she kissed
me in the vineyard and walked off down the row. We turned at a dozen paces, for love is a duel, and
looked at each other for the last time.
"See you in New York, Terry," I said. She was supposed to drive to New York in a month with her
brother. But we both knew she wouldn't make it. At a hundred feet I turned to look at her. She just
walked on back to the shack, carrying my breakfast plate in one hand. I bowed my head and
watched her. Well, lackadaddy, I was on the road again.
I walked down the highway to Sabinal, eating black walnuts from the walnut tree. I went on the SP
tracks and balanced along the rail. I passed a watertower and a factory. This was the end of
something. I went to the telegraph office of the railroad for my money order from New York. It was
closed. I swore and sat on the steps to wait. The ticket master got back and invited me in. The 
money was in; my aunt had saved my lazy butt again. "Who's going to win the World Series next
year?" said the gaunt old ticket master. I suddenly realized it was fall and that I was going back to
New York.
I walked along the tracks in the long sad October light of the valley, hoping for an SP freight to
come along so I could join the grape-eating hobos and read the funnies with them. It didn't come. I
got out on the highway and hitched a ride at once. It was the fastest, whoopingest ride of my life.
The driver was a fiddler for a California cowboy band. He had a brand-new car and drove eighty
miles an hour. "I don't drink when I drive," he said and handed me a pint. I took a. drink and offered
him one. "What the hail," he said and drank. We made Sabinal to LA in the amazing time of four
hours flat about 250 miles. He dropped me off right in front of Columbia Pictures in Hollywood; I
was just in time to run in and pick up my rejected original. Then I bought my bus ticket to
Pittsburgh. I didn't have enough money to go all the way to New York. I figured to worry about that
when I got to Pittsburgh.
With the bus leaving at ten, I had four hours to dig Hollywood alone. First I bought a loaf of bread
and salami and made myself ten sandwiches to cross the country on. I had a dollar left. I sat on the
low cement wall in back of a Hollywood parking lot and made the sandwiches. As I labored at this
absurd task, great Kleig lights of a Hollywood premiere stabbed in the sky, that humming West
Coast sky. All around me were the noises of the crazy gold-coast city. And this was my Hollywood
career-this was my last night in Hollywood, and I was spreading mustard on my lap in back of a
parking-lot John.
14
At dawn my bus was zooming across the Arizona desert-Indio, Ely the, Salome (where she
danced); the great dry stretches leading to Mexican mountains in the south. Then we swung north to
the Arizona mountains, Flagstaff, clifftowns. I had a book with me I stole from a Hollywood stall,
"Le Grand Meaulnes" by Alain-Fournier, but I preferred reading the American landscape as we
went along. Every bump, rise, and stretch in it mystified my longing. In inky night we crossed New
Mexico; at gray dawn it was Dalhart, Texas; in the bleak Sunday afternoon we rode through one
Oklahoma flat-town after another; at nightfall it was Kansas. The bus roared on. I was going home
in October. Everybody goes home in October.
We arrived in St. Louis at noon. I took a walk down by the Mississippi River and watched the logs
that came floating from Montana in the north-grand Odyssean logs of our continental dream. Old
steamboats with their scrollwork more scrolled and withered by weathers sat in the mud inhabited
by rats. Great clouds of afternoon overtopped the Mississippi Valley. The bus roared through
Indiana cornfields that night; the moon illuminated the ghostly gathered husks; it was almost 
Halloween. I made the acquaintance of a girl and we necked all the way to Indianapolis. She was
nearsighted. When we got off to eat I had to lead her by the hand to the lunch counter. She bought
my meals; my sandwiches were all gone. In exchange I told her long stories. She was coming from
Washington State, where she had spent the summer picking apples. Her home was on an upstate
New York farm. She invited me to come there. We made a date to meet at a New York hotel anyway.
She got off at Columbus, Ohio, and I slept all the way to Pittsburgh. I was wearier than I'd been for
years and years. I had three hundred and sixty-five miles yet to hitchhike to New York, and a dime
in my pocket. I walked five miles to get out of Pittsburgh, and two rides, an apple truck and a big
trailer truck, took me to Harrisburg in the soft Indian-summer rainy night. I cut right along. I
wanted to get home.
It was the night of the Ghost of the Susquehanna. The Ghost was a shriveled little old man with a
paper satchel who claimed he was headed for "Canady." He walked very fast, commanding me to
follow, and said there was a bridge up ahead we could cross. He was about sixty years old; he
talked incessantly of the meals he had, how much butter they gave him for pancakes, how many
extra slices of bread, how the old men had called him from a porch of a charity home in Maryland
and invited him to stay for the weekend, how he took a nice warm bath before he left; how he
found a brand-new hat by the side of the road in Virginia and that was it on his head; how he hit
every Red Cross in town and showed them his World War I credentials; how the Harris-burg Red
Cross was not worthy of the name; how he managed in this hard world. But as far as I could see he
was just a semi-respectable walking hobo of some kind who covered the entire Eastern Wilderness
on foot, hitting Red Cross offices and sometimes bumming on Main Street corners for a dime. We
were bums together. We walked seven miles along the mournful Susquehanna. It is a terrifying river.
It has bushy cliffs on both sides that lean like hairy ghosts over the unknown waters. Inky night
covers all. Sometimes from the railyards across the river rises a great red locomotive flare that
illuminates the horrid cliffs. The little man said he had a fine belt in his satchel and we stopped for
him to fish it out. "I got me a fine belt here somewheres-got it in Frederick, Maryland. Damn, now
did I leave that thing on the counter at Fredericksburg?"
"You mean Frederick."
"No, no, Fredericksburg, Virginia!" He was always talking about Frederick, Maryland, and
Fredericksburg, Virginia. He walked right in the road in the teeth of advancing traffic and almost
got hit several times. I plodded along in the ditch. Any minute I expected the poor little madman to
go flying in the night, dead. We never found that bridge. I left him at a railroad underpass and,
because I was so sweaty from the hike, I changed shirts and put on two sweaters; a roadhouse
illuminated my sad endeavors. A whole family came walking down the dark road and wondered
what I was doing. Strangest thing of all, a tenorman was blowing very fine blues in this
Pennsylvania hick house; I listened and moaned. It began to rain hard. A man gave me a ride back 
to Harrisburg and told me I was on the wrong road. I suddenly saw the little hobo standing under a
sad streetlamp with his thumb stuck out- poor forlorn man, poor lost sometimeboy, now broken
ghost of the penniless wilds. I told my driver the story and he stopped to tell the old man.
"Look here, fella, you're on your way west, not east."
"Heh?" said the little ghost. "Can't tell me I don't know my way around here. Been walkin this
country for years. I'm headed for Canady."
"But this ain't the road to Canada, this is the road to Pittsburgh and Chicago." The little man got
disgusted with us and walked off. The last I saw of him was his bobbing little white bag dissolving
in the darkness of the mournful Alleghenies.
I thought all the wilderness of America was in the West till the Ghost of the Susquehanna showed
me different. No, there is a wilderness in the East; it's the same wilderness Ben Franklin plodded in
the oxcart days when he was postmaster, the same as it was when George Washington was a
wild-buck Indian-fighter, when Daniel Boone told stories by Pennsylvania lamps and promised to
find the Gap, when Bradford built his road and men whooped her up in log cabins. There were not
great Arizona spaces for the little man, just the bushy wilderness of eastern Pennsylvania, Maryland,
and Virginia, the backroads, the black-tar roads that curve among the mournful rivers like
Susquehanna, Monongahela, old Potomac and Monocacy.
That night in Harrisburg I had to sleep in the railroad station on a bench; at dawn the station
masters threw me out. Isn't it true that you start your life a sweet child believing in everything
under your father's roof? Then comes the day of the Laodiceans, when you know you are wretched
and miserable and poor and blind and naked, and with the visage of a gruesome grieving ghost you
go shuddering through nightmare life. I stumbled haggardly out of the station; I had no more
control. All I could see of the morning was a whiteness like the whiteness of the tomb. I was
starving to death. All I had left in the form of calories were the last of the cough drops I'd bought in
Shelton, Nebraska, months ago; these I sucked for their sugar. I didn't know how to panhandle. I
stumbled out of town with barely enough strength to reach the city limits. I knew I'd be arrested if I
spent another night in Harrisburg. Cursed city! The ride I proceeded to get was with a skinny,
haggard man who believed in controlled starvation for the sake of health. When I told him I was
starving to death as we rolled east he said, "Fine, fine, there's nothing better for you. I myself
haven't eaten for three days. I'm going to live to be a hundred and fifty years old." He was a bag of
bones, a floppy doll, a broken stick, a maniac. I might have gotten a ride with an affluent fat man
who'd say, "Let's stop at this restaurant and have some pork chops and beans." No, I had to get a
ride that morning with a maniac who believed in controlled starvation for the sake of health. After a
hundred miles he grew lenient and took out bread-and-butter sandwiches from the back of the car.
They were hidden among his salesman samples. He was selling plumbing fixtures around
Pennsylvania. I devoured the bread and butter. Suddenly I began to laugh. I was all alone in the car, 
waiting for him as he made business calls in Allentown, and I laughed and laughed. Gad, I was sick
and tired of life. But the madman drove me home to New York.
Suddenly I found myself on Times Square. I had traveled eight thousand miles around the
American continent and I was back on Times Square; and right in the middle of a rush hour, too,
seeing with my innocent road-eyes the absolute madness and fantastic hoorair of New York with its
millions and millions hustling forever for a buck among themselves, the mad dream-grabbing,
taking, giving, sighing, dying, just so they could be buried in those awful cemetery cities beyond
Long Island City. The high towers of the land -the other end of the land, the place where Paper
America is born. I stood in a subway doorway, trying to get enough nerve to pick up a beautiful
long butt, and every time I stooped great crowds rushed by and obliterated it from my sight, and
finally it was crushed. I had no money to go home in the bus. Paterson is quite a few miles from
Times Square. Can you picture me walking those last miles through the Lincoln Tunnel or over the
Washington Bridge and into New Jersey? It was dusk. Where was Hassel? I dug the square for
Hassel; he wasn't there, he was in Riker's Island, behind bars. Where Dean? Where everybody?
Where life? I had my home to go to, my place to lay my head down and figure the losses and figure
the gain that I knew was in there somewhere too. I had to panhandle two bits for the bus. I finally
hit a Greek minister who was standing around the corner. He gave me the quarter with a nervous
lookaway. I rushed immediately to the bus.
When I got home I ate everything in the icebox. My aunt got up and looked at me. "Poor little
Salvatore," she said in Italian. "You're thin, you're thin. Where have you been all this time?" I had
on two shirts and two sweaters; my canvas bag had torn cottonfield pants and the tattered remnants
of my huarache shoes in it. My aunt and I decided to buy a new electric refrigerator with the money
I had sent her from California; it was to be the first one in the family. She went to bed, and late at
night I couldn't sleep and just smoked in bed. My half-finished manuscript was on the desk. It was
October, home, and work again. The first cold winds rattled the windowpane, and I had made it just
in time. Dean had come to my house, slept several nights there, waiting for me; spent afternoons
talking to my aunt as she worked on a great rag rug woven of all the clothes in my family for years,
which was now finished and spread on my bedroom floor, as complex and as rich as the passage of
time itself; and then he had left, two days before I arrived, crossing my path probably somewhere in
Pennsylvania or Ohio, to go to San Francisco. He had his own life there; Camille had just gotten an
apartment. It had never occurred to me to look her up while I was in Mill City. Now it was too late
and I had also missed Dean.
PART TWO
1
It was over a year before I saw Dean again. I stayed home all that time, finished my book and 
began going to school on the GI Bill of Rights. At Christmas 1948 my aunt and I went down to visit
my brother in Virginia, laden with presents. I had been writing to Dean and he said he was coming
East again; and I told him if so he would find me in Testament, Virginia, between Christmas and
New Year's. One day when all our Southern relatives were sitting around the parlor in Testament,
gaunt men and women with the old Southern soil in their eyes, talking in low, whining voices about
the weather, the crops, and the general weary recapitulation of who had a baby, who got a new
house, and so on, a mud-spattered '49 Hudson drew up in front of the house on the dirt road. I had
no idea who it was. A weary young fellow, muscular and ragged in a T-shirt, unshaven, red-eyed,
came to the porch and rang the bell. I opened the door and suddenly realized it was Dean. He had
come all the way from San Francisco to my brother Rocco's door in Virginia, and in an amazingly
short time, because I had just written my last letter, telling where I was. In the car I could see two
figures sleeping. "I'll be goddamned! Dean! Who's in the car?"
"Hello, hello, man, it's Marylou. And Ed Dunkel. We gotta have place to wash up immediately,
we're dog-tired."
"But how did you get here so fast?"
"Ah, man, that Hudson goes!"
"Where did you get it?"
"I bought it with my savings. I've been working on the railroad, making four hundred dollars a
month."
There was utter confusion in the following hour. My Southern relatives had no idea what was going
on, or who or what Dean, Marylou, and Ed Dunkel were; they dumbly stared. My aunt and my
brother Rocky went in the kitchen to consult. There were, in all, eleven people in the little Southern
house. Not only that, but my brother had just decided to move from that house, and half his
furniture was gone; he and his wife and baby were moving closer to the town of Testament. They
had bought a new parlor set and their old one was going to my aunt's house in Paterson, though we
hadn't yet decided how. When Dean heard this he at once offered his services with the Hudson. He
and I would carry the furniture to Paterson in two fast trips and bring my aunt back at the end of the
second trip. This was going to save us a lot of money and trouble. It was agreed upon. My
sister-in-law made a spread, and the three battered travelers sat down to eat. Marylou had not slept
since Denver. I thought she looked older and more beautiful now.
I learned that Dean had lived happily with Camille in San Francisco ever since that fall of 1947; he
got a job on the railroad and made a lot of money. He became the father of a cute little girl, Amy
Moriarty. Then suddenly he blew his top while walking down the street one day. He saw a '49
Hudson for sale and rushed to the bank for his entire roll. He bought the car on the spot. Ed Dunkel
was with him. Now they were broke. Dean calmed Camille's fears and told her he'd be back in a
month. "I'm going to New York and bring Sal back." She wasn't too pleased at this prospect. 
"But what is the purpose of all this? Why are you doing this to me?"
"It's nothing, it's nothing, darling-ah-hem-Sal has pleaded and begged with me to come and get him,
it is absolutely necessary for me to-but we won't go into all these explanations-and I'll tell you
why . . . No, listen, I'll tell you why." And he told her why, and of course it made no sense.
Big tall Ed Dunkel also worked on the railroad. He and Dean had just been laid off during a
seniority lapse because of a drastic reduction of crews. Ed had met a girl called Galatea who was
living in San Francisco on her savings. These two mindless cads decided to bring the girl along to
the East and have her foot the bill. Ed cajoled and pleaded; she wouldn't go unless he married her.
In a whirlwind few days Ed Dunkel married Galatea, with Dean rushing around to get the necessary
papers, and a few days before Christmas they rolled out of San Francisco at seventy miles per,
headed for LA and the snowless southern road. In LA they picked up a sailor in a travel bureau and
took him along for fifteen dollars' worth of gas. He was bound for Indiana. They also picked up a
woman with her idiot daughter, for four dollars' gas fare to Arizona. Dean sat the idiot girl with him
up front and dug her, as he said, "All the "way, man! such a gone sweet little soul. Oh, we talked,
we talked of fires and the desert turning to a paradise and her parrot that swore in Spanish."
Dropping off these passengers, they proceeded to Tucson. All along the way Galatea Dunkel, Ed's
new wife, kept complaining that she was tired and wanted to sleep in a motel. If this kept up they'd
spend all her money long before Virginia. Two nights she forced a stop and blew tens on motels. By
the time 'they got to Tucson she was broke. Dean and Ed gave her the slip in a hotel lobby and
resumed the voyage alone, with the sailor, and without a qualm.
Ed Dunkel was a tall, calm, unthinking fellow who was completely ready to do anything Dean
asked him; and at this time Dean was too busy for scruples. He was roaring through Las Cruces,
New Mexico, when he suddenly had an explosive yen to see his sweet first wife Marylou again.
She was up in Denver. He swung the car north, against the feeble protests of the sailor, and zoomed
into Denver in the evening. He ran and found Marylou in a hotel. They had ten hours of wild
lovemaking. Everything was decided again: they were going to stick. Marylou was the only girl
Dean ever really loved. He was sick with regret when he saw her face again, and, as of yore, he
pleaded and begged at her knees for the joy of her being. She understood Dean; she stroked his
hair; she knew he was mad. To soothe the sailor, Dean fixed him up with a girl in a hotel room over
the bar where the old poolhall gang always drank. But the sailor refused the girl and in fact walked
off in the night and they never saw him again; he evidently took a bus to Indiana.
Dean, Marylou, and Ed Dunkel roared east along Colfax and out to the Kansas plains. Great
snowstorms overtook them. In Missouri, at night, Dean had to drive with his scarf-wrapped head
stuck out the window, with snowglasses that made him look like a monk peering into the
manuscripts of the snow, because the windshield was covered with an inch of ice. He drove by the
birth county of his forebears without a thought. In the morning the car skidded on an icy hill and 
flapped into a ditch. A farmer offered to help them out. They got hung-up when they picked up a
hitchhiker who promised them a dollar if they'd let him ride to Memphis. In Memphis he went into
his house, puttered around looking for the dollar, got drunk, and said he couldn't find it. They
resumed across Tennessee; the bearings were beat from the accident. Dean had been driving ninety;
now he had to stick to a steady seventy or the whole motor would go whirring down the
mountainside. They crossed the Great Smoky Mountains in midwinter. When they arrived at my
brother's door they had not eaten for thirty hours-except for candy and cheese crackers.
They ate voraciously as Dean, sandwich in hand, stood bowed and jumping before the big
phonograph, listening to a wild bop record I had just bought called "The Hunt," with Dexter
Gordon and Wardell Gray blowing their tops before a screaming audience that gave the record
fantastic frenzied volume. The Southern folk looked at one another and shook their heads in awe.
"What kind of friends does Sal have, anyway?" they said to my brother. He was stumped for an
answer. Southerners don't like madness the least bit, not Dean's kind. He paid absolutely no
attention to them. The madness of Dean had bloomed into a weird flower. I didn't realize this till he
and I and Marylou and Dunkel left the house for a brief spin-the-Hudson, when for the first time we
were alone and could talk about anything we wanted. Dean grabbed the wheel, shifted to second,
mused a minute, rolling, suddenly seemed to decide something and shot the car full-jet down the
road in a fury of decision.
"All right now, children," he said, rubbing his nose and bending down to feel the emergency and
pulling cigarettes out of the compartment, and swaying back and forth as he did these things and
drove. "The time has come for us to decide what we're going to do for the next week. Crucial,
crucial. Ahem!" He dodged a mule wagon; in it sat an old Negro plodding along. "Yes!" yelled
Dean. "Yes! Dig him! Now consider his soul-stop awhile and consider." And he slowed down the
car for all of us to turn and look at the old jazzbo moaning along. "Oh yes, dig him sweet; now
there's thoughts in that mind that I would give my last arm to know; to climb in there and find out
just what he's poor-ass pondering about this year's turnip greens and ham. Sal, you don't know it but
I once lived with a farmer in Arkansas for a whole year, when I was eleven. I had awful chores, I
had to skin a dead horse once. Haven't been to Arkansas since Christmas nineteen-forty-three, five
years ago, when Ben Gavin and I were chased by a man with a gun who owned the car we were
trying to steal; I say all this to show you that of the South I can speak. 1 have known-I mean, man, I
dig the South, I know it in and out-I've dug your letters to me about it. Oh yes, oh yes," he said,
trailing off and stopping altogether, and suddenly jumping the car back to seventy and hunching
over the wheel. He stared doggedly ahead. Marylou was smiling serenely. This was the new and
complete Dean, grown to maturity. I said to myself, My God,, he's changed. Fury spat out of his
eyes when he told of things he hated; great glows of joy replaced this when he suddenly got happy;
every muscle twitched to live and go. "Oh, man, the things I could tell you," he said, poking me, 
"Oh, man, we must absolutely find the time- What has happened to Carlo? We all get to see Carlo,
darlings, first thing tomorrow. Now, Marylou, we're getting some bread and meat to make a lunch
for New York. How much money do you have, Sal? We'll put everything in the back seat, Mrs. P's
furniture, and all of us will sit up front cuddly and close and tell stories as we zoom to New York.
Marylou, honeythighs, you sit next to me, Sal next, then Ed at the window, big Ed to cut off drafts,
whereby he comes into using the robe this time. And then we'll all go off to sweet life, 'cause now is
the time and we all know time!" He rubbed his jaw furiously, he swung the car and passed three
trucks, he roared into downtown Testament, looking in every direction and seeing everything in an
arc of 180 degrees around his eyeballs without moving his head. Bang, he found a parking space in
no time, and we were parked. He leaped out of the car. Furiously he hustled into the railroad
station; we followed sheepishly. He bought cigarettes. He had become absolutely mad in his
movements; he seemed to be doing everything at the same time. It was. a shaking of the head, up
and down, sideways; jerky, vigorous hands; quick walking, sitting, crossing the legs, uncrossing,
getting up, rubbing the hands, rubbing his fly, hitching his pants, looking up and saying "Am," and
sudden slitting of the eyes to see everywhere; and all the time he was grabbing me by the ribs and
talking, talking.
It was very cold in Testament; they'd had an unseasonable snow. He stood in the long bleak main
street that runs along-the railroad, clad in nothing but a T-shirt and low-hanging pants with the belt
unbuckled, as though he was about to take them off. He came sticking his head in to talk to
Marylou; he backed away, fluttering his hands before her. "Oh yes, I know! I know you, I know
you, darling!" His laugh was. maniacal; it started low and ended high, exactly like the laugh of a
radio maniac, only faster and more like a titter. Then he kept reverting to businesslike tones. There
was no purpose in our coming downtown, but he found purposes. He made us all hustle, Marylou
for the lunch groceries, me for a paper to dig the weather report, Ed for cigars. Dean loved to
smoke cigars. He smoked one over the paper and talked. "Ah, our holy American slopjaws in
Washington are planning further inconveniences - ah-hem! - aw - hup! hup!" And he leaped off and
rushed to see a colored girl that just then passed outside the station. "Dig her," he said, standing
with limp finger pointed, fingering himself with a goofy smile, "that little gone black lovely. Ah!
Hmm!" We got in the car and flew back to my brother's house.
I had been spending a quiet Christmas in the country, as I realized when we got back into the house
and I saw the Christmas tree, the presents, and smelled the roasting turkey and listened to the talk
of the relatives, but now the bug was on me again, and the bug's name was Dean Moriarty and 1
was off on another spurt around the road.
2
We packed my brother's furniture in back of the car and took off at dark, promising to be back in 
thirty hours -thirty hours for a thousand miles north and south. But that's the way Dean wanted it. It
was a tough trip, and none of us noticed it; the heater was not working and consequently the
windshield developed fog and ice; Dean kept reaching out while driving seventy to wipe it with a
rag and make a hole to see the road. "Ah, holy hole!" In the spacious Hudson we had plenty of
room for all four of us to sit up front. A blanket covered our laps. The radio was not working. It was
a brand-new car bought five days ago, and already it was broken. There was only one installment
paid on it, too. Off we went, north to Washington, on 301, a straight two-lane highway without
much traffic. And Dean talked, no one else talked. He gestured furiously, he leaned as far as me
sometimes to make a point, sometimes he had no hands on the wheel and yet the car went as
straight as an arrow, not for once deviating from the white line in the middle of the road that
unwound, kissing our left front tire.
It was a completely meaningless set of circumstances that made Dean come, and similarly I went
off with him for no reason. In New York I had been attending school and romancing around with a
girl called Lucille, a beautiful Italian honey-haired darling that I actually wanted to marry. All these
years I was looking for the woman I wanted to marry. I couldn't meet a girl without saying to
myself, What kind of wife would she make? I told Dean and Marylou about Lucille. Marylou
wanted to know all about Lucille, she wanted to meet her. We zoomed through Richmond,
Washington, Baltimore, and up to Philadelphia on a winding country road and talked. "I want to
marry a girl," I told them, "so I can rest my soul with her till we both get old. This can't go on all
the time-all this franticness and jumping around. We've got to go someplace, find something."
"Ah now, man," said Dean, "I've been digging you for years about the home and marriage and all
those fine wonderful things about your soul." It was a sad night; it was also a merry night. In
Philadelphia we went into a lunchcart and ate hamburgers with our last food dollar. The
counterman- it was three A.M.-heard us talk about money and offered to give us the hamburgers
free, plus more coffee, if we all pitched in and washed dishes in the back because his regular man
hadn't shown up. We jumped to it. Ed Dunkel said he was an old pearldiver from way back and
pitched his long arms into the dishes. Dean stood googing around with a towel, so did Marylou.
Finally they started necking among the pots and pans; they withdrew to a dark corner in the pantry.
The counterman was satisfied as long as Ed and I did the dishes. We finished them in fifteen
minutes. When daybreak came we were zooming through New Jersey with the great cloud of
Metropolitan New York rising before us in the snowy distance. Dean had a sweater wrapped around
his ears to keep warm. He said we were a band of Arabs coming in to blow up New York. We
swished through the Lincoln Tunnel and cut over to Times Square; Marylou wanted to see it.
"Oh damn, I wish I could find Hassel. Everybody look sharp, see if they can find him." We all
scoured the sidewalks. "Good old gone Hassel. Oh you should have seen him in Texas."
So now Dean had come about four thousand miles from Frisco, via Arizona and up to Denver, 
inside four days, with innumerable adventures sandwiched in, and it was only the beginning.
3
We went to my house in Paterson and slept. I was the first to wake up, late in the afternoon. Dean
and Marylou were sleeping on my bed, Ed and I on my aunt's bed. Dean's battered unhinged trunk
lay sprawled on the floor with socks sticking out. A phone call came for me in the drugstore
downstairs. I ran down; it was from New Orleans. It was Old Bull Lee, who'd moved to New
Orleans. Old Bull Lee in his high, whining voice was making a complaint. It seemed a girl called
Galatea Dunkel had just arrived at his house for a guy Ed Dunkel; Bull had no idea who these
people were. Galatea Dunkel was a tenacious loser. I told Bull to reassure her that Dunkel was with
Dean and me and that most likely we'd be picking her up in New Orleans on the way to the Coast.
Then the girl herself talked on the phone. She wanted to know how Ed was. She was all concerned
about his happiness.
"How did you get from Tucson to New Orleans?" I asked. She said she wired home for money and
took a bus. She was determined to catch up with Ed because she loved him. I went upstairs and told
Big Ed. He sat in the chair with a worried look, an angel of a man, actually.
"All right, now," said Dean, suddenly waking up and leaping out of bed, "what we must do is eat, at
once. Marylou, rustle around the kitchen see what there is. Sal, you and I go downstairs and call
Carlo. Ed, you see what you can do straightening out the house." I followed Dean, bustling
downstairs.
The guy who ran the drugstore said, "You just got another call - this one from San Francisco - for a
guy called Dean Moriarty. I said there wasn't anybody by that name." It was sweetest Camille,
calling Dean. The drugstore man, Sam, a tall, calm friend of mine, looked at me and scratched his
head. "Geez, what are you running, an international whorehouse?"
Dean tittered maniacally. "I dig you, man!" He leaped into the phone booth and called San
Francisco collect. Then we called Carlo at his home in Long Island and told him to come over.
Carlo arrived two hours later. Meanwhile Dean and I got ready for our return trip alone to Virginia
to pick up the rest of the furniture and bring my aunt back. Carlo Marx came, poetry under his arm,
and sat in an easy chair, watching us with beady eyes. For the first half-hour he refused to say
anything; at any rate, he refused to commit himself. He had quieted down since the Denver
Doldrum days; the Dakar Doldrums had done it. In Dakar, wearing a beard, he had wandered the
back streets with little children who led him to a witch-doctor who told him his fortune. He had
snapshots of crazy streets with grass huts, the hip back-end of Dakar. He said he almost jumped off
the ship like Hart Crane on the way back. Dean sat on the floor with a music box and listened with
tremendous amazement at the little song it played, "A Fine Romance"-"Little tinkling whirling
doodlebells. Ah! Listen! We'll all bend down together and look into the center of the music box till 
we learn about the secrets-tinklydoodle-bell, whee." Ed Dunkel was also sitting on the floor; he had
my drumsticks; he suddenly began beating a tiny beat to go with the music box, that we barely
could hear. Everybody held his breath to listen. "Tick . . . tack . . . tick-tick . . . tack-tack." Dean
cupped a hand over his ear; his mouth hung open; he said, "Ah! Whee!"
Carlo watched this silly madness with slitted eyes. Finally he slapped his knee and said, "I have an
announcement to make."
"Yes? Yes?"
"What is the meaning of this voyage to New York? What kind of sordid business are you on now? I
mean, man, whither goest thou? Whither goest thou, America, in thy shiny car in the night?"
"Whither goest thou?" echoed Dean with his mouth open. We sat and didn't know what to say; there
was nothing to talk about any more. The only thing to do was go. Dean leaped up and said we were
ready to go back to Virginia. He took a shower, I cooked up a big platter of rice with all that was
left in the house, Marylou sewed his socks, and we were ready to go. Dean and Carlo and I zoomed
into New York. We promised to see Carlo in thirty hours, in time for New Year's Eve. It was night.
We left him at Times Square and went back through the expensive tunnel and into New Jersey and
on the road. Taking turns at the wheel, Dean and I made Virginia in ten hours.
"Now this is the first time we've been alone and in a position to talk for years," said Dean. And he
talked all night. As in a dream, we were zooming back through sleeping Washington and back in
the Virginia wilds, crossing the Appomattox River at daybreak, pulling up at my brother's door at
eight A.M. And all this time Dean was tremendously excited about everything he saw, everything
he talked about, every detail of every moment that passed. He was out of his mind with real belief.
"And of course now no one can tell us that there is no God. We've passed through all forms. You
remember, Sal, when I first came to New York and I wanted Chad King to teach me about
Nietzsche. You see how long ago? Everything is fine, God exists, we know time. Everything since
the Greeks has been predicated wrong. You can't make it with geometry and geometrical systems of
thinking. It's all this!" He wrapped his finger in his fist; the car hugged the line straight and true.
"And not only that but we both understand that I couldn't have time to explain why I know and you
know God exists." At one point I moaned about life's troubles-how poor my family was, how much
I wanted to help Lucille, who was also poor and had a daughter. "Troubles, you see, is the
generalization-word for what God exists in. The thing is not to get hung-up. My head rings!" he
cried, clasping his head. He rushed out of the car like Groucho Marx to get cigarettes- that furious,
ground-hugging walk with the coattails flying, except that he had no coattails. "Since Denver, Sal, a
lot of things- Oh, the things-I've thought and thought. I used to be in reform school all the time, I
was a young punk, asserting myself-stealing cars a psychological expression of my position, hincty
to show. All my jail-problems are pretty straight now. As far as I know I shall never be in jail again.
The rest is not my fault." We passed a little kid who was throwing stones at the cars in the road. 
"Think of it," said Dean. "One day he'll put a stone through a man's windshield and the man will
crash and die-all on account of that little kid. You see what I mean? God exists without qualms. As
we roll along this way 1 am positive beyond doubt that everything will be taken care of for us-that
even you, as you drive, fearful of the wheel" (I hated to drive and drove carefully)-"the thing will
go along of itself and you won't go off the road and I can sleep. Furthermore we know America,
we're at home; I can go anywhere in America and get what I want because it's the same in every
corner, I know the people, I know what they do. We give and take and go in the incredibly
complicated sweetness zigzagging every side." There was nothing clear about the things he said,
but what he meant to say was somehow made pure and clear. He used the word "pure" a great deal.
I had never dreamed Dean would become a mystic. These were the first days of his mysticism,
which would lead to the strange, ragged W. C. Fields saintliness of his later days.
Even my aunt listened to him with a curious half-ear as we roared back north to New York that
same night with the furniture in the back. Now that my aunt was in the car, Dean settled down to
talking about his worklife in San Francisco. We went over every single detail of what a brakeman
has to do, demonstrating every time we passed yards, and at one point he even jumped out of the
car to show me how a brakeman gives a highball at a meet at a siding. My aunt retired to the back
seat and went to sleep. In Washington at four A.M. Dean again called Camille collect in Frisco.
Shortly after this, as we pulled out of Washington, a cruising car overtook us with siren going and
we had a speeding ticket in spite of the fact that we were going about thirty. It was the California
license plate that did it. "You guys think you can rush through here as fast as you want just because
you come from California?" said the cop.
I went with Dean to the sergeant's desk and we tried to explain to the police that we had no money.
They said Dean would have to spend the night in jail if we didn't round up the money. Of course
my aunt had it, fifteen dollars; she had twenty in all, and it was going to be just fine. And in fact
while we were arguing with the cops one of them went out to peek at my aunt, who sat wrapped in
the back of the car. She saw him.
"Don't worry, I'm not a gun moll. If you want to come and search the car, go right ahead. I'm going
home with my nephew, and this furniture isn't stolen; it's my niece's, she just had a baby and she's
moving to her new house." This flabbergasted Sherlock and he went back in the station house. My
aunt had to pay the fine for Dean or we'd be stuck in Washington; I had no license. He promised to
pay it back, and he actually did, exactly a year and a half later and to my aunt's pleased surprise.
My aunt-a respectable woman hung-up in this sad world, and well she knew the world. She told us
about the cop. "He was hiding behind the tree, trying to see what I looked like. I told him-I told him
to search the car if he wanted. I've nothing to be ashamed of." She knew Dean had something to be
ashamed of, and me too, by virtue of my being with Dean, and Dean and I accepted this sadly.
My aunt once said the world would never find peace until men fell at their women's feet and asked 
for forgiveness. But Dean knew this; he'd mentioned it many times. "I've pleaded and pleaded with
Marylou for a peaceful sweet understanding of pure love between us forever with all hassles
thrown out- she understands; her mind is bent on something else-she's after me; she won't
understand how much I love her, she's knitting my doom."
"The truth of the matter is we don't understand our women; we blame on them and it's all our fault,"
I said.
"But it isn't as simple as that," warned Dean. "Peace will come suddenly, we won't understand when
it does-see, man?" Doggedly, bleakly, he pushed the car through New Jersey; at dawn I drove into
Paterson as he slept in the back. We arrived at the house at eight in the morning to find Marylou
and Ed Dunkel sitting around smoking butts from the ashtrays; they hadn't eaten since Dean and I
left. My aunt bought groceries and cooked up a tremendous breakfast.
4
Now it was time for the Western threesome to find new living quarters in Manhattan proper. Carlo
had a pad on York Avenue; they were moving in that evening. We slept all day, Dean and I, and
woke up as a great snowstorm ushered in New Year's Eve, 1948. Ed Dunkel was sitting in my easy
chair, telling about the previous New Year's. "I was in Chicago. I was broke. I was sitting at the
window of my hotel room on North Clark Street and the most delicious smell rose to my nostrils
from the bakery downstairs. I didn't have a dime but I went down and talked to the girl. She gave
me bread and coffee cakes free. I went back to my room and ate them. I stayed in my room all night.
In Farmington, Utah, once,  here I went to work with Ed Wall-you know Ed Wall, the rancher's
son in Denver-I was in my bed and all of a sudden I saw my dead mother standing in the corner
with light all around her. I said, 'Mother!' She disappeared. I have visions all the time," said Ed
Dunkel, nodding his head.
"What are you going to do about Galatea?"
"Oh, we'll see. When we get to New Orleans. Don't you think so, huh?" He was starting to turn to
me as well for advice; one Dean wasn't enough for him. But he was already in love with Galatea,
pondering it.
"What are you going to do with yourself, Ed?" I asked.
"I don't know," he said. "I just go along. I dig life." He repeated it, following Dean's line. He had no
direction. He sat reminiscing about that night in Chicago and the hot coffee cakes in the lonely
room.
The snow whirled outside. A big party was on hand in New York; we were all going. Dean packed
his broken trunk, put it in the car, and we all took off for the big night. My aunt was happy with the
thought that my brother would be visiting her the following week; she sat with her paper and
waited for the midnight New Year's Eve broadcast from Times Square. We roared into New York, 
swerving on ice. I was never scared when Dean drove; he could handle a car under any
circumstances. The radio had been fixed and now he had wild bop to urge us along the night. I
didn't know where all this was leading; I didn't care.
Just about that time a strange thing began to haunt me. It was this: I had forgotten something. There
was a decision that I was about to make before Dean showed up, and now it was driven clear out of
my mind but still hung on the tip of my mind's tongue. I kept snapping my fingers, trying to
remember it. I even mentioned it. And I couldn't even tell if it was a real decision or just a thought I
had forgotten. It haunted and flabbergasted me, made me sad. It had to do somewhat with the
Shrouded Traveler. Carlo Marx and I once sat down together, knee to knee, in two chairs, facing,
and I told him a dream I had about a strange Arabian figure that was pursuing me across the desert;
that I tried to avoid; that finally overtook me just before I reached the Protective City. "Who is
this?" said Carlo. We pondered it. I proposed it was myself, wearing a shroud. That wasn't it.
Something, someone, some spirit was pursuing all of us across the desert of life and was bound to
catch us before we reached heaven. Naturally, now that I look back on it, this is only death: death
will overtake us before heaven. The one thing that we yearn for in our living days, that makes us
sigh and groan and undergo sweet nauseas of all kinds, is the remembrance of some lost bliss that
was probably experienced in the womb and can only be reproduced (though we hate to admit it) in
death. But who wants to die? In the rush of events I kept thinking about this in the back of my mind.
I told it to Dean and he instantly recognized it as the mere simple longing for pure death; and
because we're all of us never in life again, he, rightly, would have nothing to do with it, and I
agreed with him then.
We went looking for my New York gang of friends. The crazy flowers bloom there too. We went to
Tom Saybrook's first. Tom is a sad, handsome fellow, sweet, generous, and amenable; only once in
a while he suddenly has fits of depression and rushes off without saying a word to anyone. This
night he was overjoyed. "Sal, where did you find these absolutely wonderful people? I've never
seen anyone like them."
"I found them in the West."
Dean was having his kicks; he put on a jazz record, grabbed Marylou, held her tight, and bounced
against her with the beat of the music. She bounced right back. It was a real love dance. Ian
MacArthur came in with a huge gang. The New Year's weekend began, and lasted three days and
three nights. Great gangs got in the Hudson and swerved in the snowy New York streets from party
to party. I brought Lucille and her sister to the biggest party. When Lucille saw me with Dean and
Marylou her face darkened-she sensed the madness they put in me.
"I don't like you when you're with them."
"Ah, it's all right, it's just kicks. We only live once. We're having a good time."
"No, it's sad and I don't like it." 
Then Marylou began making love to me; she said Dean was going to stay with Camille and she
wanted me to go with her. "Come back to San Francisco with us. We'll live together. I'll be a good
girl for you." But I knew Dean loved Marylou, and I also knew Marylou was doing this to make
Lucille jealous, and I wanted nothing of it. Still and all, I licked my lips for the luscious blonde.
When Lucille saw Marylou pushing me into the corners and giving me the word and forcing kisses
on me she accepted Dean's invitation to go out in the car; but they just talked and drank some of the
Southern moonshine I left in the compartment. Everything was being mixed up, and all was falling.
I knew my affair with Lucille wouldn't last much longer. She wanted me to be her way. She was
married to a longshoreman who treated her badly. I was willing to marry her and take her baby
daughter and all if she divorced the husband; but there wasn't even enough money to get a divorce
and the whole thing was hopeless, besides which Lucille would never understand me because I like
too many things and get all confused and hung-up running from one falling star to another till I
drop. This is the night, what it does to you. I had nothing to offer anybody except my own
confusion.
The parties were enormous; there were at least a hundred people at a basement apartment in the
West Nineties. People overflowed into the cellar compartments near the furnace. Something was
going on in every corner, on every bed and couch-not an orgy but just a New Year's party with
frantic screaming and wild radio music. There was even a Chinese girl. Dean ran like Groucho
Marx from group to group, digging everybody. Periodically we rushed out to the car to pick up
more people. Damion came. Damion is the hero of my New York gang, as Dean is the chief hero of
the Western. They immediately took a dislike to each other. Damion's girl suddenly socked Damion
on the jaw with a roundhouse right. He stood reeling. She carried him home. Some of our mad
newspaper friends came in from the office with bottles. There was a tremendous and wonderful
snowstorm going on outside. Ed Dunkel met Lucille's sister and disappeared with her; I forgot to
say that Ed Dunkel is a very smooth man with the women. He's six foot four, mild, affable,
agreeable, bland, and delightful. He helps women on with their coats. That's the way to do things.
At five o'clock in the morning we were all rushing through the backyard of a tenement and
climbing in through a window of an apartment where a huge party was going on. At dawn we were
back at Tom Saybrook's. People were drawing pictures and drinking stale beer. I slept on a couch
with a girl called Mona in my arms. Great groups filed in from the old Columbia Campus bar.
Everything in life, all the faces of life, were piling into the same dank room. At Ian MacArthur's the
party went on. Ian MacArthur is a wonderful sweet fellow who wears glasses and peers out of them
with delight. He began to learn "Yes!" to everything, just like Dean at this time, and hasn't stopped
since. To the wild sounds of Dexter Gordon and Wardell Gray blowing "The Hunt," Dean and I
played catch with Marylou over the couch; she was no small doll either. Dean went around with no
undershirt, just his pants, barefoot, till it was time to hit the car and fetch more people. Everything 
happened. We found the wild, ecstatic Rollo Greb and spent a night at his house on Long Island.
Rollo lives in a nice house with his aunt; when she dies the house is all his. Meanwhile she refuses
to comply with any of his wishes and hates his friends. He brought this ragged gang of Dean,
Marylou, Ed, and me, and began a roaring party. The woman prowled upstairs; she threatened to
call the police. "Oh, shut up, you old bag!" yelled Greb. I wondered how he could live with her like
this. He had more books than I've ever seen in all my life-two libraries, two rooms loaded from
floor to ceiling around all four walls, and such books as the Apocryphal Something-or-Other in ten
volumes. He played Verdi operas and pantomimed them in his pajamas with a great rip down the
back. He didn't give a damn about anything. He is a great scholar who goes reeling down the New
York waterfront with original seventeenth-century musical manuscripts under his arm, shouting. He
crawls like a big spider through the streets. His excitement blew out of his eyes in stabs of fiendish
light. He rolled his neck in spastic ecstasy. He lisped, he writhed, he flopped, he moaned, he
howled, he fell back in despair. He could hardly get a word out, he was so excited with life. Dean
stood before him with head bowed, repeating over and over again, "Yes . . . Yes . . . Yes." He took
me into a corner. "That Rollo Greb is the greatest, most wonderful of all. That's what I was trying to
tell you-that's what I want to be. I want to be like him. He's never hung-up, he goes every direction,
he lets it all out, he knows time, he has nothing to do but rock back and forth. Man, he's the end!
You see, if you go like him all the time you'll finally get it."
"Get what?"
"IT! IT! I'll tell you-now no time, we have no time now." Dean rushed back to watch Rollo Greb
some more.
George Shearing, the great jazz pianist, Dean said, was exactly like Rollo Greb. Dean and I went to
see Shearing at Bird-* land in the midst of the long, mad weekend. The place was deserted, we
were the first customers, ten o'clock. Shearing'1 came out, blind, led by the hand to his keyboard.
He was distinguished-looking Englishman with a stiff white collar,! slightly beefy, blond, with a
delicate English-summer's-night air about him that came out in the first rippling sweet number! he
played as the bass-player leaned to him reverently and} thrummed the beat. The drummer, Denzil
Best, sat motionless! except for his wrists snapping the brushes. And Shearing began to rock; a
smile broke over his ecstatic face; he began to rock in the piano seat, back and forth, slowly at first,
then the beat went up, and he began rocking fast, his left foot jumped up with every beat, his neck
began to rock crookedly, he brought his face down to the keys, he pushed his hair back, his combed
hair dissolved, he began to sweat. The music I picked up. The bass-player hunched over and socked
it in, faster and faster, it seemed faster and faster, that's all. Shearing began to play his chords; they
rolled out of the piano in great rich showers, you'd think the man wouldn't have time to line them
up. They rolled and rolled like the sea. Folks yelled for him to "Go!" Dean was sweating; the swear
poured down his collar. "There he is! That's him! Old God! Old God Shearing! Yes! Yes! Yes!" And 
Shearing was conscious of the madman behind him, he could hear every one of Dean's gasps and
imprecations, he could sense it though he couldn't see. "That's right!" Dean said. "Yes!" Shearing
smiled; he rocked. Shearing rose from the piano, dripping with sweat; these were his great 1949
days before he became cool and commercial. When he was gone Dean pointed to the empty piano
seat. "God's empty chair," he said. On the piano a horn sat; its golden shadow made a strange
reflection along the desert caravan painted on the wall behind the drums. God was gone; it was the
silence of his departure. It was a rainy night. It was the myth of the rainy night. Dean was popeyed
with awe. This madness would lead nowhere. I didn't know what was happening to me, and I
suddenly realized it was only the tea that we were smoking; Dean had bought some in New York. It
made me think that everything was about to arrive -the moment when you know all and everything
is decided forever.
5
I left everybody and went home to rest. My aunt said I was wasting my time hanging around with
Dean and his gang. I knew that was wrong, too. Life is life, and kind is kind. What I wanted was to
take one more magnificent trip to the West Coast and get back in time for the spring semester in
school. And what a trip it turned out to be! I only went along for the ride, and to see what else Dean
was going to do, and finally, also, knowing Dean would go back to Camille in Frisco, I wanted to
have an affair with Marylou. We got ready to cross the groaning continent again. I drew my GI
check and gave Dean eighteen dollars to mail to his wife; she was waiting for him to come home
and she was broke. What was on Marylou's mind I don't know. Ed Dunkel, as ever, just followed.
There were long, funny days spent in Carlo's apartment before we left. He went around in his
bathrobe and made semi-ironical speeches: "Now I'm not trying to take your hincty sweets from
you, but it seems to me the time has come to decide what you are and what you're going to do."
Carlo was working as typist in an office. "I want to know what all this sitting around the house all
day is intended to mean. What all this talk is and what you propose to do. Dean, why did you leave
Camille and pick up Marylou?" No answer-giggles. "Marylou, why are you traveling around the
country like this and what are your womanly intentions concerning the shroud?" Same answer. "Ed
Dunkel, why did you abandon your new wife in Tucson and what are you doing here sitting on your
big fat ass? Where's your home? What's your job?" Ed Dunkel bowed his head in genuine
befuddlement. "Sal -how comes it you've fallen on such sloppy days and what have you done with
Lucille?" He adjusted his bathrobe and sat facing us all. "The days of wrath are yet to come. The
balloon won't sustain you much longer. And not only that, but it's an abstract balloon. You'll all go
flying to the West Coast and come staggering back in search of your stone."
In these days Carlo had developed a tone of voice which he hoped sounded like what he called The
Voice of Rock; the whole idea was to stun people into the realization of the rock. "You pin a dragon 
to your hats," he warned us; "you're up in the attic with the bats." His mad eyes glittered at us.
Since the Dakar Doldrums he had gone through a terrible period which he called the Holy
Doldrums, or Harlem Doldrums, when he lived in Harlem in midsummer and at night woke up in
his lonely room and heard "the great machine" descending from the sky; and when he walked on 12
5th Street "under water" with all the other fish. It was a riot of radiant ideas that had come to
enlighten his brain. He made Marylou sit on his lap and commanded her to subside. He told Dean,
"Why don't you just sit down and relax? Why do you jump around so much?" Dean ran around,
putting sugar in his coffee and saying, "Yes! Yes! Yes!" At night Ed Dunkel slept on the floor on
cushions, Dean and Marylou pushed Carlo out of bed, and Carlo sat up in the kitchen over his
kidney stew, mumbling the predictions of the rock. I came in days and watched everything.
Ed Dunkel said to me, "Last night I walked clear down to Times Square and just as I arrived I
suddenly realized I was a ghost-it was my ghost walking on the sidewalk." He said these things to
me without comment, nodding his head emphatically. Ten hours later, in the midst of someone
else's conversation, Ed said, "Yep, it was my ghost walking on the sidewalk."
Suddenly Dean leaned to me earnestly and said, "Sal, I have something to ask of you-very
important to me-I wonder how you'll take it-we're buddies, aren't we?"
"Sure are, Dean." He almost blushed. Finally he came out with it: he wanted me to work Marylou. I
didn't ask him why because I knew he wanted to see what Marylou was like with another man. We
were sitting in Ritzy's Bar when he proposed the idea; we'd spent an hour walking Times Square,
looking for Hassel. Ritzy's Bar is the hoodlum bar of the streets around Times Square; it changes
names every year. You walk in there and you don't see a single girl, even in the booths, just a great
mob of young men dressed in all varieties of hoodlum cloth, from red shirts to zoot suits. It is also
the hustlers' bar -the boys who make a living among the sad old homos of the Eighth Avenue night.
Dean walked in there with his eyes slitted to see every single face. There were wild Negro queers,
sullen guys with guns, shiv-packing seamen, thin, noncommittal junkies, and an occasional
well-dressed middle-aged detective, posing as a bookie and hanging around half for interest and
half for duty. It was the typical place for Dean to put down his request. All kinds of evil plans are
hatched in Ritzy's Bar-you can sense it in the air-and all kinds of mad sexual routines are initiated
to go with them. The safecracker proposes not only a certain loft on i4th Street to the hoodlum, but
that they sleep together. Kinsey spent a lot of time in Ritzy's Bar, interviewing some of the boys; I
was there the night his assistant came, in 1945. Hassel and Carlo were interviewed.
Dean and I drove back to the pad and found Marylou in bed. Dunkel was roaming his ghost around
New York. Dean told her what we had decided. She said she was pleased. I wasn't so sure myself. I
had to prove that I'd go through with it. The-bed had been the deathbed of a big man and sagged in
the middle. Marylou lay there, with Dean and myself on each side of her, poised on the upjutting
mattress-ends, not knowing what to say. I said, "Ah hell, I can't do this." 
"Go on, man, you promised!" said Dean.
"What about Marylou?" I said. "Come on, Marylou, what do you think?"
"Go ahead," she said.
She embraced me and I tried to forget old Dean was there. Every time I realized he was there in the
dark, listening for every sound, I couldn't do anything but laugh. It was horrible.
"We must all relax," said Dean.
"I'm afraid I can't make it. Why don't you go in the kitchen a minute?"
Dean did so. Marylou was so lovely, but I whispered, "Wait until we be lovers in San Francisco; my
heart isn't in it." I was right, she could tell. It was three children of the earth trying to decide
something in the night and having all the weight of past centuries ballooning in the dark before
them. There was a strange quiet in the apartment. I went and tapped Dean and told him to go to
Marylou; and I retired to the couch. I could hear Dean, blissful and blabbering and frantically
rocking. Only a guy who's spent five years in jail can go to such maniacal helpless extremes;
beseeching at the portals of the soft source, mad with a completely physical realization of the
origins of life-bliss; blindly seeking to return the way he came. This is the result of years looking at
sexy pictures behind bars; looking at the legs and breasts of women in popular magazines;
evaluating the hardness of the steel halls and the softness of the woman who is not there. Prison is
where you promise yourself the right to live. Dean had never seen his mother's face. Every new girl,
every new wife, every new child was an addition to his bleak impoverishment. Where was his
father?-old bum Dean Moriarty the Tinsmith, riding freights, working as a scullion in railroad
cookshacks, stumbling, down-crashing in wino alley nights, expiring on coal piles, dropping his
yellowed teeth one by one in the gutters of the West. Dean had every right to die the sweet deaths
of complete love of his Marylou-1 didn't want to interfere, I just wanted to follow.
Carlo came back at dawn and put on his bathrobe. He wasn't sleeping any more those days. "Ech!"
he screamed. He was going out of his mind from the confusion of jam on the floor, pants, dresses
thrown around, cigarette butts, dirty dishes, open books-it was a great forum we were having.
Every day the world groaned to turn and we were making our appalling studies of the night.
Marylou was black and blue from a fight w ith Dean about something; his face was scratched. It
was time to go.
We drove to my house, a whole gang of ten, to get my bag and call Old Bull Lee in New Orleans
from the phone in the bar where Dean and I had our first talk years ago when he came to my door
to learn to write. We heard Bull's whining voice eighteen hundred miles away. "Say, what do you
boys expect me to do with this Galatea Dunkel? She's been here two weeks now, hiding in her room
and refusing to talk to either Jane or me. Have you got this character Ed Dunkel with you? For
krissakes bring him down and get rid of her. She's sleeping in our best bedroom and's run clear out
of money. This ain't a hotel." He assured Bull with whoops and cries over the phone-there was 
Dean, Marylou, Carlo, Dunkel, me, lan MacArthur, his wife, Tom Saybrook, God knows who else,
all yelling and drinking beer over the phone at befuddled Bull, who above all things hated
confusion. "Well," he said, "maybe you'll make better sense when you gets down here if you gets
down here." I said good-by to my aunt and promised to be back in two weeks and took off for
California again.
6
It was drizzling and mysterious at the beginning of our journey. I could see that it was all going to
be one big saga of the mist. "Whooee!" yelled Dean. "Here we go!" And he hunched over the wheel
and gunned her; he was back in his element, everybody could see that. We were all delighted, we
all realized we were leaving confusion and nonsense behind and performing our one and noble
function of the time, move.
And we moved! We flashed past the mysterious white signs in the night somewhere in New Jersey
that say SOUTH (with an arrow) and WEST (with an arrow) and took the south one. New Orleans!
It burned in our brains. From the dirty snows of "frosty fagtown New York," as Dean called it, all
the way to the greeneries and river smells of old New Orleans at the washed-out bottom of
America; then west. Ed was in the back seat; Marylou and Dean and I sat in front and had the
warmest talk about the goodness and joy of life. Dean suddenly became tender. "Now dammit, look
here, all of you, we all must admit that everything is fine and there's no need in the world to worry,
and in fact we should realize what it would mean to us to UNDERSTAND that we're not REALLY
worried about ANYTHING. Am I right?" We all agreed. "Here we go, we're all together . . . What
did we do in New York? Let's forgive." We all had our spats back there. "That's behind us, merely
by miles and inclinations. Now we're heading down to New Orleans to dig Old Bull Lee and ain't
that going to be kicks and listen will you to this old tenorman blow his top"-he shot up the radio
volume till the car shuddered-"and listen to him tell the story and put down true relaxation and
knowledge."
We all jumped to the music and agreed. The purity of the road. The white line in the middle of the
highway unrolled and hugged our left front tire as if glued to our groove. Dean hunched his
muscular neck, T-shirted in the winter night, and blasted the car along. He insisted I drive through
Baltimore for traffic practice; that was all right, except he and Marylou insisted on steering while
they kissed and fooled around. It was crazy; the radio was on full blast. Dean beat drums on the
dashboard till a great sag developed in it; I did too. The poor Hudson-the slow boat to China-was
receiving her beating.
"Oh man, what kicks!" yelled Dean. "Now Marylou, listen really, honey, you know that I'm hotrock
capable of everything at the same time and I have unlimited energy-now in San Francisco we must
go on living together. I know just the place for you-at the end of the regular chain-gang run-I'll be 
home just a cut-hair less than every two days and for twelve hours at a stretch, and man, you know
what we can do in twelve hours, darling. Meanwhile I'll go right on living at Camille's like nothin,
see, she won't know. We can work it, we've done it before." It was all right with Marylou, she was
really out for Camille's scalp. The understanding had been that Marylou would switch to me in
Frisco, but I now began to see they were going to stick and I was going to be left alone on my butt
at the other end of the continent. But why think about that when all the golden land's ahead of you
and all kinds of unforeseen events wait lurking to surprise you and make you glad you're alive to
see?
We arrived in Washington at dawn. It was the day of Harry Truman's inauguration for his second
term. Great displays of war might were lined along Pennsylvania Avenue as we rolled by in our
battered boat. There were 6-295, PT boats, artillery, all kinds of war material that looked murderous
in the snowy grass; the last thing was a regular small ordinary lifeboat that looked pitiful and
foolish. Dean slowed down to look at it. He kept shaking his head in awe. "What are these people
up to? Harry's sleeping somewhere in this town. . . . Good old Harry. . . . Man from Missouri, as I
am. . . . That must be his own boat."
Dean went to sleep in the back seat and Dunkel drove. We gave him specific instructions to take it
easy. No sooner were we snoring than he gunned the car up to eighty, bad bearings and all, and not
only that but he made a triple pass at a spot where a cop was arguing with a motorist-he was in the
fourth lane of a four-lane highway, going the wrong way. Naturally the cop took after us with his
siren whining. We were stopped. He told us to follow him to the station house. There was a mean
cop in there who took an immediate dislike to Dean; he could smell jail all over him. He sent his
cohort outdoors to question Marylou and me privately. They wanted to know how old Marylou was,
they were trying to whip up a Mann Act idea. But she had her marriage certificate. Then they took
me aside alone and wanted to know who was sleeping with Marylou. "Her husband," I said quite
simply. They were curious. Something was fishy. They tried some amateur Sherlocking by asking
the same questions twice, expecting us to make a slip. I said, "Those two fellows are going back to
work on the railroad in California, this is the short one's wife, and I'm a friend on a two-week
vacation from college."
The cop smiled and said, "Yeah? Is this really your own wallet?"
Finally the mean one inside fined Dean twenty-five dollars. We told them we only had forty to go
all the way to the Coast; they said that made no difference to them. When Dean protested, the mean
cop threatened to take him back to Pennsylvania and slap a special charge on him.
"What charge?"
"Never mind what charge. Don't worry about that, wise guy."
We had to give them the twenty-five. But first Ed Dunkel, that culprit, offered to go to jail. Dean
considered it. The cop was infuriated; he said, "If you let your partner go to jail I'm taking you back 
to Pennsylvania right now. You hear that?" All we wanted to do was go. "Another speeding ticket in
Virginia and you lose your car," said the mean cop as a parting volley. Dean was red in the face. We
drove off silently. It was just like an invitation to steal to take our trip-money away from us. They
knew we were broke and had no relatives on the road or to wire to for money. The American police
are involved in psychological warfare against those Americans who don't frighten them with
imposing papers and threats. It's a Victorian police force; it peers out of musty windows and wants
to inquire about everything, and can make crimes if the crimes don't exist to its satisfaction. "Nine
lines of crime, one of boredom," said Louis-Ferdinand Celine. Dean was so mad he wanted to come
back to Virginia and shoot the cop as soon as he had a gun.
"Pennsylvania!" he scoffed. "I wish I knew what that charge was! Vag, probably; take all my money
and charge me vag. Those guys have it so damn easy. They'll out and shoot you if you complain,
too." There was nothing to do but get happy with ourselves again and forget about it. When we got
through Richmond we began forgetting about it, and soon everything was okay.
Now we had fifteen dollars to go all the way. We'd have to pick up hitchhikers and bum quarters off
them for gas. In the Virginia wilderness suddenly we saw a man walking on the road. Dean zoomed
to a stop. I looked back and said he was only a bum and probably didn't have a cent.
"We'll just pick him up for kicks!" Dean laughed. The man was a ragged, bespectacled mad type,
walking along reading a paperbacked muddy book he'd found in a culvert by the road. He got in the
car and went right on reading; he was incredibly filthy and covered with scabs. He said his name
was Hyman Solomon and that he walked all over the USA, knocking and sometimes kicking at
Jewish doors and demanding money: "Give me money to eat, I am a Jew."
He said it worked very well and that it was coming to him. We asked him what he was reading. He
didn't know. He didn't bother to look at the title page. He was only looking at the words, as though
he had found the real Torah where it belonged, in the wilderness.
"See? See? See?" cackled Dean, poking my ribs. "I told you it was kicks. Everybody's kicks, man!"
We carried Solomon all the way to Testament. My brother by now was in his new house on the
other side of town. Here we were back on the long, bleak street with the railroad track running
down the middle and the sad, sullen Southerners loping in front of hardware stores and
five-and-tens.
Solomon said, "I see you people need a little money to continue your journey. You wait for me and
I'll go hustle up a few dollars at a Jewish home and I'll go along with you as far as Alabama." Dean
was all beside himself with happiness; he and I rushed off to buy bread and cheese spread for a
lunch in the car. Marylou and Ed waited in the car. We spent two hours in Testament waiting for
Hyman Solomon to show up; he was hustling for his bread somewhere in town, but we couldn't see
him. The sun began to grow red and late.
Solomon never showed up so we roared out of Testament. "Now you see, Sal, God does exist, 
because we keep getting hung-up with this town, no matter what we try to do, and you'll notice the
strange Biblical name of it, and that strange Biblical character who made us stop here once more,
and all things tied together all over like rain connecting everybody the world over by chain
touch. . . ." Dean rattled on like this; he was overjoyed and exuberant. He and I suddenly saw the
whole country like an oyster for us to open; and the pearl was there, the pearl was there. Off we
roared south. We picked up another hitchhiker. This was a sad young kid who said he had an aunt
who owned a grocery store in Dunn, North Carolina, right outside Fayetteville. "When we get there
can you bum a buck off her? Right! Fine! Let's go!" We were in Dunn in an hour, at dusk. We drove
to where the kid said his aunt had the grocery store. It was a sad little street that dead-ended at a
factory wall. There was a grocery store but there was no aunt. We wondered what the kid was
talking about. We asked him how far he was going; he didn't know. It was a big hoax; once upon a
time, in some lost back-alley adventure, he had seen the grocery store in Dunn, and it was the first
story that popped into his disordered, feverish mind. We bought him a hot dog, but Dean said we
couldn't take him along because we needed room to sleep and room for hitchhikers who could buy
a little gas. This was sad but true. We left him in Dunn at nightfall.
I drove through South Carolina and beyond Macon, Georgia, as Dean, Marylou, and Ed slept. All
alone in the night I had my own thoughts and held the car to the white line in the holy road. What
was I doing? Where was I going? I'd soon find out. I got dog-tired beyond Macon and woke up
Dean to resume. We got out of the car for air and suddenly both of us were stoned with joy to
realize that in the darkness all around us was fragrant green grass and the smell of fresh manure and
warm waters. "We're in the South! We've left the winter!" Faint daybreak illuminated green shoots
by the side of the road. I took a deep breath; a locomotive howled across-the darkness,
Mobile-bound. So were we. I took off my shirt and exulted. Ten miles down the road Dean drove
into a filling-station with the motor off, noticed that the attendant was fast asleep at the desk,
jumped out, quietly filled the gas tank, saw to it the bell didn't ring, and rolled off like an Arab with
a five-dollar tankful of gas for our pilgrimage.
I slept and woke up to the crazy exultant sounds of music and Dean and Marylou talking and the
great green land rolling by. "Where are we?"
"Just passed the tip of Florida, man-Flomaton, it's called." Florida! We were rolling down to the
coastal plain and Mobile; up ahead were great soaring clouds of the Gulf of Mexico. It was only
thirty-two hours since we'd said good-by to everybody in the dirty snows of the North. We stopped
at a gas station, and there Dean and Marylou played piggyback around the tanks and Dunkel went
inside and stole three packs of cigarettes without trying. We were fresh out. Rolling into Mobile
over the long tidal highway, we all took our winter clothes off and enjoyed the Southern
temperature. This was when Dean started telling his life story and when, beyond Mobile, he came
upon an obstruction of wrangling cars at a crossroads and instead of slipping around them just 
balled right through the driveway of a gas station and went right on without relaxing his steady
continental seventy. We left gaping faces behind us. He went right on with his tale. "I tell you it's
true, I started at nine, with a girl called Milly Mayfair in back of Rod's garage on Grant Street-same
street Carlo lived on in Denver. That's when my father was still working at the smithy's a bit. I
remember my aunt yelling out the window, 'What are you doing down there in back of the garage?'
Oh honey Marylou, if I'd only known you then! Wow! How sweet you musta been at nine." He
tittered maniacally; he stuck his finger in her mouth and licked it; he took her hand and rubbed it
over himself. She just sat there, smiling serenely.
Big long Ed Dunkel sat looking out the window, talking to himself. "Yes sir, I thought I was a ghost
that night." He was also wondering what Galatea Dunkel would say to him in New Orleans.
Dean went on. "One time I rode a freight from New Mexico clear to LA-I was eleven years old, lost
my father at a siding, we were all in a hobo jungle, I was with a man called Big Red, my father was
out drunk in a boxcar-it started to roll-Big Red and I missed it-I didn't see my father for months. I
rode a long freight all the way to California, really flying, first-class freight, a desert Zipper. All the
way I rode over the couplings-you can imagine how dangerous, I was only a kid, I didn't
know-clutching a loaf of bread under one arm and the other hooked around the brake bar. This is no
story, this is true. When I got to LA I was so starved for milk and cream I got a job in a dairy and
the first thing I did I drank two quarts of heavy cream and puked."
"Poor Dean," said Marylou, and she kissed 'him. He stared ahead proudly. He loved her.
We were suddenly driving along the blue waters of the Gulf, and at the same time a momentous
mad thing began on the radio; it was the Chicken Jazz'n Gumbo disk-jockey show from New
Orleans, all mad jazz records, colored records, with the disk jockey saying, "Don't worry 'bout
nothing!" We saw New Orleans in the night ahead of us with joy. Dean rubbed his hands over the
wheel. "Now we're going to get our kicks!" At dusk we were coming into the humming streets of
New Orleans. "Oh, smell the people!" yelled Dean with his face out the window, sniffing. "Ah!
God! Life!" He swung around a trolley. "Yes!" He darted the car and looked in every direction for
girls. "Look at her!" The air was so sweet in New Orleans it seemed to come in soft bandannas; and
you could smell the river and really smell the people, and mud, and molasses, and every kind of
tropical exhalation with your nose suddenly removed from the dry ices of a Northern winter. We
bounced in our seats. "And dig her!" yelled Dean, pointing at another woman. "Oh, I love, love,
love women! I think women are wonderful! I love women!" He spat out the window; he groaned;
he clutched his head. Great beads of sweat fell from his forehead from pure excitement and
exhaustion.
We bounced the car up on the Algiers ferry and found ourselves crossing the Mississippi River by
boat. "Now we must all get out and dig the river and the people and smell the world," said Dean,
bustling with his sunglasses and cigarettes and leaping out of the car like a jack-in-the-box. We 
followed.
On rails we leaned and looked at the great brown father of waters rolling down from mid-America
like the torrent of broken souls-bearing Montana logs and Dakota muds and Iowa vales and things
that had drowned in Three Forks, where the secret began in ice. Smoky New Orleans receded on
one side; old, sleepy Algiers with its warped woodsides bumped us on the other. Negroes were
working in the hot afternoon, stoking the ferry furnaces that burned red and made our tires smell.
Dean dug them, hopping up and down in the heat. He rushed around the deck and upstairs with his
baggy pants hanging halfway down his belly. Suddenly I saw him eagering on the flying bridge. I
expected him to take off on wings. I heard his mad laugh all over the boat-"Hee-hee-hee-hee-hee!"
Marylou was with him. He covered everything in a jiffy, came back with the full story, jumped in
the car just as everybody was tooting to go, and we slipped off, passing two or three cars in a
narrow space, and found ourselves darting through Algiers.
"Where? Where?" Dean was yelling.
We decided first to clean up at a gas station and inquire for Bull's whereabouts. Little children were
playing in the drowsy river sunset; girls were going by with bandannas and cotton blouses and bare
legs. Dean ran up the street to see everything. He looked around; he nodded; he rubbed his belly.
Big Ed sat back in the car with his hat over his eyes, smiling at Dean. I sat on the fender. Marylou
was in the women's John. From bushy shores where infinitesimal men fished with sticks, and from
delta sleeps that stretched up along the reddening land, the big humpbacked river with its
mainstream leaping came coiling around Algiers like a snake, with a nameless rumble. Drowsy,
peninsular Algiers with all her bees and shanties was like to be washed away someday. The sun
slanted, bugs flip-flopped, the awful waters groaned.
We went to Old Bull Lee's house outside town near the river levee. It was on a road that ran across
a swampy field. The house was a dilapidated old heap with sagging porches running around and
weeping willows in the yard; the grass was a yard high, old fences leaned, old barns collapsed.
There was no one in sight. We pulled right into the yard and saw washtubs on the back porch. I got
out and went to the screen door. Jane Lee was standing in it with her eyes cupped toward the sun.
"Jane," I said. "It's me. It's us."
She knew that. "Yes, I know. Bull isn't here now. Isn't that a fire or something over there?" We both
looked toward the sun.
"You mean the sun?"
"Of course I don't mean the sun-I heard sirens that way. Don't you know a peculiar glow?" It was
toward New Orleans; the clouds were strange.
"I don't see anything," I said.
Jane snuffed down her nose. "Same old Paradise."
That was the way we greeted each other after four years; Jane used to live with my wife and me in 
New York. "And is Galatea Dunkel here?" I asked. Jane was still looking for her fire; in those days
she ate three tubes of benzedrine paper a day. Her face, once plump and Germanic and pretty, had
become stony and red and gaunt. She had caught polio in New Orleans and limped a little.
Sheepishly Dean and the gang came out of the car and more or less made themselves at home.
Galatea Dunkel came out of her stately retirement in the back of the house to meet her tormentor.
Galatea was a serious girl. She was pale and looked like tears all over. Big Ed passed his hand
through his hair and said hello. She looked at him steadily.
"Where have you been? Why did you do this to me?" And she gave Dean a dirty look; she knew the
score. Dean paid absolutely no attention; what he wanted now was food; he asked Jane if there was
anything. The confusion began right there.
Poor Bull came home in his Texas Chevy and found his house invaded by maniacs; but he greeted
me with a nice warmth I hadn't seen in him for a long time. He had bought this house in New
Orleans with some money he had made growing black-eyed peas in Texas with an old college
schoolmate whose father, a mad-paretic, had died and left a fortune. Bull himself only got fifty
dollars a week from his own family, which wasn't too bad except that he spent almost that much per
week on his drug habit-and his wife was also expensive, gobbling up about ten dollars' worth of
benny tubes a week. Their food bill was the lowest in the country; they hardly ever ate; nor did the
children-they didn't seem to care. They had two wonderful children: Dodie, eight years old; and
little Ray, one year. Ray ran around stark naked in the yard, a little blond child of the rainbow. Bull
called him "the Little Beast," after W. C. Fields. Bull came driving into the yard and unrolled
himself from the car bone by bone, and came over wearily, wearing glasses, felt hat, shabby suit,
long, lean, strange, and laconic, saying, "Why, Sal, you finally got here; let's go in the house and
have a drink."
It would take all night to tell about Old Bull Lee; let's just say now, he was a teacher, and it may be
said that he had every right to teach because he spent all his time learning; and the things he learned
were what he considered to be and called "the facts of life," which he learned not only out of
necessity but because he wanted to. He dragged his long, thin body around the entire United States
and most of Europe and North Africa in his time, only to see what was going on; he married a
White Russian countess in Yugoslavia to get her away from the Nazis in the thirties; there are
pictures of him with the international cocaine set of the thirties-gangs with wild hair, leaning on one
another; there are other pictures of him in a Panama hat, surveying the streets of Algiers; he never
saw the White Russian countess again. He was an exterminator in Chicago, a bartender in New
York, a summons-server in Newark. In Paris he sat at cafe tables, watching the sullen French faces
go by. In Athens he looked up from his ouzo at what he called the ugliest people in the world. In
Istanbul he threaded his "way through crowds of opium addicts and rug-sellers, looking for the
facts. In English hotels he read Spengler and the Marquis de Sade. In Chicago he planned to hold 
up a Turkish bath, hesitated just for two minutes too long for a drink, and wound up with two
dollars and had to make a run for it. He did all these things merely for the experience. Now the final
study was the drug habit. He was now in New Orleans, slipping along the streets with shady
characters and haunting connection bars.
There is a strange story about his college days that illustrates something else about him: he had
friends for cocktails in his well-appointed rooms one afternoon when suddenly his pet ferret rushed
out and bit an elegant teacup queer on the ankle and everybody hightailed it out the door, screaming.
Old Bull leaped up and grabbed his shotgun and said, "He smells that old rat again," and shot a hole
in the wall big enough for fifty rats. On the wall hung a picture of an ugly old Cape Cod house. His
friends said, "Why do you have that ugly thing hanging there?" and Bull said, "I like it because it's
ugly." All his life was in that line. Once I knocked on his door in the 60th Street slums of New York
and he opened it wearing a derby hat, a vest with nothing underneath, and long striped sharpster
pants; in his hands he had a cookpot, birdseed in the pot, and was trying to mash the seed to roll in
cigarettes. He also experimented in boiling codeine cough syrup down to a black mash - that didn't
work too well. He spent long hours with Shakespeare - the "Immortal Bard," he called him - on his
lap. In New Orleans he had begun to spend long hours with the Mayan 'Codices on his lap, and,
although he went on talking, the book lay open all the time. I said once, "What's going to happen to
us when we die?" and he said, "When you die you're just dead, that's all." He had a set of chains in
his room that he said he used with his psychoanalyst; they were experimenting with narcoanalysis
and found that Old Bull had seven separate personalities, each growing worse and worse on the
way down, till finally he was a raving idiot and had to be restrained with chains. The top
personality was an English lord, the bottom the idiot. Halfway he was an old Negro who stood in
line, waiting with everyone else, and said, "Some's bastards, some's ain't, that's the score."
Bull had a sentimental streak about the old days m America, especially 1910, when you could get
morphine in a drugstore without prescription and Chinese smoked opium in their evening windows
and the country was wild and brawling and free, with abundance and any kind of freedom for
everyone. His chief hate was Washington bureaucracy; second to that, liberals; then cops. He spent
all his time talking and teaching others. Jane sat at his feet; so did I; so did Dean; and so had Carlo
Marx. We'd all learned from him. He was a gray, nondescript-looking fellow you wouldn't notice on
the street, unless you looked closer and saw his mad, bony skull with its strange youthfulness-a
Kansas minister with exotic, phenomenal fires and mysteries. He had studied medicine in Vienna;
had studied anthropology, read everything; and now he was settling to his life's work, which was
the study of things them-selves.-in the streets of life and the night. He sat in his chair; Jane brought
drinks, martinis. The shades by his chair were always drawn, day and night; it was his corner of the
house. On his lap were the Mayan Codices and an air gun which he occasionally raised to pop
benzedrine tubes across the room. I kept rushing around, putting up new ones. We all took shots 
and meanwhile we talked. Bull was curious to know the reason for this trip. He peered at us and
snuffed down his nose, thfump, like a sound in a dry tank.
"Now, Dean, I want you to sit quiet a minute and tell me what you're doing crossing the country
like this."
Dean could only blush and say, "Ah well, you know how it is."
"Sal, what are you going to the Coast for?" "Only for a few days. I'm coming back to school."
"What's the score with this Ed Dunkel? What kind of character is he?" At that moment Ed was
making up to Galatea in the bedroom; it didn't take him long. We didn't know what to tell Bull
about Ed Dunkel. Seeing that we didn't know anything about ourselves, he whipped out three sticks
of tea and said to go ahead, supper'd be ready soon.
"Ain't nothing better in the world to give you an appetite. I once ate a horrible lunchcart hamburg
on tea and it seemed like the most delicious thing in the world. I just got back from Houston last
week, went to see Dale about our black-eyed peas. I was sleeping in a motel one morning when all
of a sudden I was blasted out of bed. This damn fool had just shot his wife in the room next to mine.
Everybody stood around confused, and the guy just got in his car and drove off, left the shotgun on
the floor for the sheriff. They finally caught him in Houma, drunk as a lord. Man ain't safe going
around this country any more without a gun." He pulled back his coat and showed us his revolver.
Then he opened the drawer and showed us the rest of his arsenal. In New York he once had a
sub-machine-gun under his bed. "I got something better than that now - a German Scheintoth gas
gun; look at this beauty, only got one shell. I could knock out a hundred men with this gun and have
plenty of time to make a getaway. Only thing wrong, I only got one shell."
"I hope I'm not around when you try it," said Jane from the kitchen. "How do you know it's a gas
shell?" Bull snuffed; he never paid any attention to her sallies but he heard them. His relation with
his wife was one of the strangest: they talked till late at night; Bull liked to hold the floor, he went
right on in his dreary monotonous voice, she tried to break in, she never could; at dawn he got tired
and then Jane talked and he listened, snuffing and going thfump down his nose. She loved that man
madly, but in a delirious way of some kind; there was never any mooching and mincing around,
just talk and a very deep companionship that none of us would ever be able to fathom. Something
curiously unsympathetic and cold between them was really a form of humor by which they
communicated their own set of subtle vibrations. Love is all; Jane was never more than ten feet
away from Bull and never missed a word he said, and he spoke in a very low voice, too.
Dean and I were yelling about a big night in New Orleans and wanted Bull to show us around. He
threw a damper on this. "New Orleans is a very dull town. It's against the law to go to the colored
section. The bars are insufferably dreary."
I said, "There must be some ideal bars in town."
"The ideal bar doesn't exist in America. An ideal bar is something that's gone beyond our ken. In 
nineteen ten a bar was a place where men went to meet during or after work, and all there was was
a long counter, brass rails, spittoons, player piano for music, a few mirrors, and barrels of whisky at
ten cents a shot together with barrels of beer at five cents a mug. Now all you get is chromium,
drunken women, fags, hostile bartenders, anxious owners who hover around the door, worried
about their leather seats and the law; just a lot of screaming at the wrong time and deadly silence
when a stranger walks in."
We argued about bars. "All right," he said, "I'll take you to New Orleans tonight and show you what
I mean." And he deliberately took us to the dullest bars. We left Jane with the children; supper was
over; she was reading the want ads of the New Orleans Times-Picayune. I asked her if she was
looking for a job; she only said it was the most interesting part of the paper. Bull rode into town
with us and went right on talking. "Take it easy, Dean, we'll get there, I hope; hup, there's the ferry,
you don't have to drive us clear into the river." He held on. Dean had gotten worse, he confided in
me. "He seems to me to be headed for his ideal fate, which is compulsive psychosis dashed with a
jigger of psychopathic irresponsibility and violence." He looked at Dean out of the corner of his eye.
"If you go to California with this madman you'll never make it. Why don't you stay in New Orleans
with me? We'll play the horses over to Graetna and relax in my yard. I've got a nice set of knives
and I'm building a target. Some pretty juicy dolls downtown, too, if that's in your line these days."
He snuffed. We were on the ferry and Dean had leaped out to lean over the rail. I followed, but Bull
sat on in the car, snuffing, thfump. There was a mystic wraith of fog over the brown waters that
night, together with dark driftwoods; and across the way New Orleans glowed orange-bright, with a
few dark ships at her hem, ghostly fogbound Cereno ships with Spanish balconies and ornamental
poops, till you got up close and saw they were just old freighters from Sweden and Panama. The
ferry fires glowed in the night; the same Negroes plied the shovel and sang. Old Big Slim Hazard
had once worked on the Algiers ferry as a deckhand; this made me think of Mississippi Gene too;
and as the river poured down from mid-America by starlight I knew, I knew like mad that
everything I had ever known and would ever know was One. Strange to say, too, that night we
crossed the ferry with Bull Lee a girl committed suicide off the deck; either just before or just after
us; we saw it in the paper the next day.
We hit all the dull bars in the French Quarter with Old Bull and went back home at midnight. That
night Marylou took everything in the books; she took tea, goofballs, benny, liquor, and even asked
Old Bull for a shot of M, which of course he didn't give her; he did give her a martini. She was so
saturated with elements of all kinds that she came to a standstill and stood goofy on the porch with
me. It was a wonderful porch Bull had. It ran clear around the house; by moonlight with the
willows it looked like an old Southern mansion that had seen better days. In the house Jane sat
reading the want ads in the living room; Bull was in the bathroom taking his fix, clutching his old
black necktie in his teeth for a tourniquet and jabbing with the needle into his woesome arm with 
the thousand holes; Ed Dunkel was sprawled out with Galatea in the massive master bed that Old
Bull and Jane never used; Dean was rolling tea; and Marylou and I imitated Southern aristocracy.
"Why, Miss Lou, you look lovely and most fetching tonight."
"Why, thank you, Crawford, I sure do appreciate the nice things you do say."
Doors kept opening around the crooked porch, and members of our sad drama in the American
night kept popping out to find out where everybody was. Finally I took a walk alone to the levee. I
wanted to sit on the muddy bank and dig the Mississippi River; instead of that I had to look at it
with my nose against a wire fence. When you start separating the people from their rivers what
have you got? "Bureaucracy!" says Old Bull; he sits with Kafka on his lap, the lamp burns above
him, he snuffs, thfump. His old house creaks. And the Montana log rolls by in the big black river of
the night. " 'Tain't nothin but bureaucracy. And unions! Especially unions!" But dark laughter would
come again.
7
It was there in the morning when I got up bright and early and found Old Bull and Dean in the back
yard. Dean was wearing his gas-station coveralls and helping Bull. Bull had found a great big piece
of thick rotten wood and was desperately yanking with a hammerhook at little nails imbedded in it.
We stared at the nails; there were millions of them; they were like worms.
"When I get all these nails out of this I'm going to build me a shelf that'll last a thousand years!"
said Bull, every bone shuddering with boyish excitement. "Why, Sal, do you realize the shelves
they build these days crack under the weight of knickknacks after six months or generally collapse?
Same with houses, same with clothes. These bastards have invented plastics by which they could
make houses that last forever. And tires. Americans are killing themselves by the millions every
year with defective rubber tires that get hot on the road and blow up. They could make tires that
never blow up. Same with tooth powder. There's a certain gum they've invented and they won't
show it to anybody that if you chew it as a kid you'll never get a cavity for the rest of your born
days. Same with clothes. They can make clothes that last forever. They prefer making cheap goods
so's everybody'll have to go on working and punching timeclocks and organizing themselves in
sullen unions and floundering around while the big grab goes on in Washington and Moscow." He
raised his big piece of rotten wood. "Don't you think this'll make a splendid shelf?"
It was early in the morning; his energy was at its peak. The poor fellow took so much junk into his
system he could only weather the greater proportion of his day in that chair with the lamp burning
at noon, but in the morning he was magnificent. We began throwing knives at the target. He said
he'd seen an Arab in Tunis who could stick a man's eye from forty feet. This got him going on his
aunt, who went to the Casbah in the thirties. "She was with a party of tourists led by a guide. She
had a diamond ring on her little finger. She leaned on a wall to rest a minute and an Ay-rab rushed 
up and appropriated her ring finger before she could let out a cry, my dear. She suddenly realized
she had no little finger. Hi-hi-hi-hi-hi!" When he laughed he compressed his lips together and made
it come out from his belly, from far away, and doubled up to lean on his knees. He laughed a long
time. "Hey Jane!" he yelled gleefully. "I was just telling Dean and Sal about my aunt in the
Casbah!"
"I heard you," she said across the lovely warm Gulf morning from the kitchen door. Great beautiful
clouds floated overhead, valley clouds that made you feel the vastness of old tumbledown holy
America from mouth to mouth and tip to tip. All pep and juices was Bull. "Say, did I ever tell you
about Dale's father? He was the funniest old man you ever saw in your life. He had paresis, which
eats away the forepart of your brain and you get so's you're not responsible for anything that comes
into your mind. He had a house in Texas and had carpenters working twenty-four hours a day
putting on new wings. He'd leap up in the middle of the night and say, 'I don't want that goddam
wing; put it over there.' The carpenters had to take everything down and start all over again. Come
dawn you'd see them hammering away at the new wing. Then the old man'd get bored with that and
say, 'Goddammit, I wanta go to Maine!' And he'd get into his car and drive off a hundred miles an
hour-great showers of chicken feathers followed his track for hundreds of miles. He'd stop his car
in the middle of a Texas town just to get out and buy some whisky. Traffic would honk all around
him and he'd come rushing out of the store, yelling, 'Thet your goddam noith, you bunth of bathats!'
He lisped; when you have paresis you lips, I mean you lisps. One night he came to my house in
Cincinnati and tooted the horn and said, 'Come on out and let's go to Texas to see Dale.' He was
going back from Maine. He claimed he bought a house-oh, we wrote a story about him at college,
where you see this horrible shipwreck and people in the water clutching at the sides of the lifeboat,
and the old man is there with a machete, hackin at their fingers. 'Get away, ya bunth a bathats, thith
my cottham boath!' Oh, he was horrible. I could tell you stories about him all day. Say, ain't this a
nice day?"
And it sure was. The softest breezes blew in from the levee; it was worth the whole trip. We went
into the house after Bull to measure the wall for a shelf. He showed us the dining-room table he
built. It was made of wood six inches thick. "This is a table that'll last a thousand years!" said Bull,
leaning his long thin face at us maniacally. He banged on it.
In the evenings he sat at this table, picking at his food and throwing the bones to the cats. He had
seven cats. "I love cats. I especially like the ones that squeal when I hold 'em over the bathtub." He
insisted on demonstrating; someone was in the bathroom. "Well," he said, "we can't do that now.
Say, I been having a fight with the neighbors next door." He told us about the neighbors; they were
a vast crew with sassy children who threw stones over the rickety fence at Dodie and Ray and
sometimes at Old Bull. He told them to cut it out; the old man rushed out and yelled something in
Portuguese. Bull went in the house and came back with his shotgun, upon which he leaned 
demurely; the incredible simper on his face beneath the long hatbrim, his whole body writhing
coyly and snakily as he waited, a grotesque, lank, lonely clown beneath the clouds. The sight of
him the Portuguese must have thought something out of an old evil dream.
We scoured the yard for things to do. There was a tremendous fence Bull had been working on to
separate him from the obnoxious neighbors; it would never be finished, the task was too much. He
rocked it back and forth to show how solid it was. Suddenly he grew tired and quiet and went in the
house and disappeared in the bathroom for his pre-lunch fix. He came out glassy-eyed and calm,
and sat down under his burning lamp. The sunlight poked feebly behind the drawn shade. "Say,
why don't you fellows try my orgone accumulator? Put some juice in your bones. I always rush up
and take off ninety miles an hour for the nearest whorehouse, hor-hor-hor!" This was his "laugh"
laugh-when he wasn't really laughing. The orgone accumulator is an ordinary box big enough for a
man to sit inside on a chair: a layer of wood, a layer of metal, and another layer of wood gather in
orgones from the atmosphere and hold them captive long enough for the human body to absorb
more than a usual share. According to Reich, orgones are vibratory atmospheric atoms of the
life-principle. People get cancer because they run out of orgones. Old Bull thought his orgone
accumulator would be improved if the wood he used was as organic as possible, so he tied bushy
bayou leaves and twigs to his mystical outhouse. It stood there in the hot, flat yard, an exfoliate
machine clustered and bedecked with maniacal contrivances. Old Bull slipped off his clothes and
went in to sit and moon over his navel. "Say, Sal, after lunch let's you and me go play the horses
over to the bookie joint in Graetna." He was magnificent. He took a nap after lunch in his chair, the
air gun on his lap and little Ray curled around his neck, sleeping. It was a pretty sight, father and
son, a father who would certainly never bore his son when it came to finding things to do and talk
about. He woke up with a start and stared at me. It took him a minute to recognize who I was.
"What are you going to the Coast for, Sal?" he asked, and went back to sleep in a moment.
In the afternoon we went to Graetna, just Bull and me. We drove in his old Chevy. Dean's Hudson
was low and sleek; Bull's Chevy was high and rattly. It was just like 1910. The bookie joint was
located near the waterfront in a big chromium-leather bar that opened up in the back to a
tremendous hall where entries and numbers were posted on the wall. Louisiana characters lounged
around with Racing Forms. Bull and I had a beer, and casually Bull went over to the slot| machine
and threw a half-dollar piece in. The counters I clicked "Jackpot"-"Jackpot"-"Jackpot"-and the last|
 "Jackpot" hung for just a moment and slipped back to "Cherry." He had lost a hundred dollars or
more just by a hair. "Damn!" yelled Bull. "They got these things adjusted. You could see it right
then. I had the jackpot and the mechanism clicked it back. Well, what you gonna do." We examined
the Racing Form. I hadn't played the horses in years and was bemused with all the new names.
There was one horse called Big Pop that sent me into a temporary trance thinking of my father, who
used to play the horses with me. I was just about to mention it to Old Bull when he said, "Well I 
think I'll try this Ebony Corsair here."
Then I finally said it. "Big Pop reminds me of my father."
He mused for just a second, his clear blue eyes fixed on mine hypnotically so that I couldn't tell
what he was thinking or where he was. Then he went over and bet on Ebony Corsair. Big Pop won
and paid fifty to one.
"Damn!" said Bull. "I should have known better, I've had experience with this before. Oh, when
will we ever learn?"
"What do you mean?"
"Big Pop is what I mean. You had a vision, boy, a vision. Only damn fools pay no attention to
visions. How do you know your father, who was an old horseplayer, just didn't momentarily
communicate to you that Big Pop was going to win the race? The name brought the feeling up in
you, he took advantage of the name to communicate. That's what I was thinking about when you
mentioned it. My cousin in Missouri once bet on a horse that had a name that reminded him of his
mother, and it won and paid a big price. The same thing happened this afternoon." He shook his
head. "Ah, let's go. This is the last time I'll ever play the horses with you around; all these visions
drive me to distraction." In the car as we drove back to his old house he said, "Mankind will
someday realize that we are actually in contact with the dead and with the other world, whatever it
is; right now we could predict, if we only exerted enough mental will, what is going to happen
within the next hundred years and be able to take steps to avoid all kinds of catastrophes. When a
man dies he undergoes a mutation in his brain that we know nothing about now but which will be
very clear someday if scientists get on the ball. The bastards right now are only interested in seeing
if they can blow up the world."
We told Jane about it. She sniffed. "It sounds silly to me." She plied the broom around the kitchen.
Bull went in the bathroom for his afternoon fix.
Out on the road Dean and Ed Dunkel were playing basketball with Dodie's ball and a bucket nailed
on a lamppost. I joined in. Then we turned 10 feats of athletic prowess. Dean completely amazed
me. He had Ed and me hold a bar of iron up to our waists, and just standing there he popped right
over it, holding his heels. "Go ahead, raise it." We kept raising it till it was chest-high. Still he
jumped over it with ease. Then he tried the running broad jump and did at least twenty feet and
more. Then I raced him down the road. I can do the hundred in 10:5. He passed me like the wind.
As we ran I had a mad vision of Dean running through all of life just like that -his bony face
outthrust to life, his arms pumping, his brow sweating, his legs twinkling like Groucho Marx,
yelling, "Yes! Yes, man, you sure can go!" But nobody could go as fast as he could, and that's the
truth. Then Bull came out with a couple of knives and started showing us how to disarm a would-be
shiver in a dark alley. I for my part showed him a very good trick, which is falling on the ground in
front of your adversary and gripping him with your ankles and flipping him over on his hands and 
grabbing his wrists in full nelson. He said it was pretty good. He demonstrated some jujitsu. Little
Dodie called her mother to the porch and said, "Look at the silly men." She was such a cute sassy
little thing that Dean couldn't take his eyes off her.
"Wow. Wait till she grows up! Can you see her cuttin down Canal Street with her cute eyes. Ah!
Oh!" He hissed through his teeth.
We spent a mad day in downtown New Orleans walking around with the Dunkels. Dean was out of
his mind that day. When he saw the T & NO freight trains in the yard he wanted to show me
everything at once. "You'll be brakeman 'fore I'm through with ya!" He and I and Ed Dunkel ran
across the tracks and hopped a freight at three individual points; Marylou and Galatea were waiting
in the car. We rode the train a half-mile into the piers, waving at switchmen and flagmen. They
showed me the proper way to get off a moving car; the back foot first and let the train go away
from you and come around and place the other foot down. They showed me the refrigerator cars,
the ice compartments, good for a ride on any winter night in a string of empties. "Remember what I
told you about New Mexico to LA?" cried Dean. "This was the way I hung on . . ."
We got back to the girls an hour late and of course they were mad. Ed and Galatea had decided to
get a room in New Orleans and stay there and work. This was okay with Bull, who was getting sick
and tired of the whole mob. The invitation, originally, was for me to come alone. In the front room,
where Dean and Marylou slept, there were jam and coffee stains and empty benny tubes all over the
floor; what's more it was Bull's workroom and he couldn't get on with his shelves. Poor Jane was
driven to distraction by the continual jumping and running around on the part of Dean. We were
waiting for my next GI check to come through; my aunt was forwarding it. Then we were off, the
three of us-Dean, Marylou, me. When the check came I realized I hated to leave Bull's wonderful
house so suddenly, but Dean was all energies and ready to do.
In a sad red dusk we were finally seated in the car and Jane, Dodie, little boy Ray, Bull, Ed, and
Galatea stood around in the high grass, smiling. It was good-by. At the last moment Dean and Bull
had a misunderstanding over money; Dean had wanted to borrow; Bull said it was out of the
question. The feeling reached back to Texas days. Con-man Dean was antagonizing people away
from him by degrees. He giggled maniacally and didn't care; he rubbed his fly, stuck his finger in
Marylou's dress, slurped up her knee, frothed at the mouth, and said, "Darling, you know and I
know that everything is straight between us at last beyond the furthest abstract definition in
metaphysical terms or any terms you want to specify or sweetly impose or harken back . . ." and so
on, and zoom went the car and we were off again for California.
8
What is that feeling when you're driving away from people and they recede on the plain till you see
their specks dispersing?-it's the too-huge world vaulting us, and it's good-by. But we lean forward 
to the next crazy venture beneath the skies.
We wheeled through the sultry old light of Algiers, back on the ferry, back toward the
mud-splashed, crabbed old ships across the river, back on Canal, and out; on a two-lane highway to
Baton Rouge in purple darkness; swung west there, crossed the Mississippi at a place called Port
Alien. Port Alien-where the river's all rain and roses in a misty pinpoint darkness and where we
swung around a circular drive in yellow foglight and suddenly saw the great black body below a ,
bridge and crossed eternity again. What is the Mississippi River?-a washed clod in the rainy night,
a soft plopping ( from drooping Missouri banks, a dissolving, a riding of the tide down the eternal
waterbed, a contribution to brown foams, a voyaging past endless vales and trees and levees, *
down along, down along, by Memphis, Greenville, Eudora, Vicksburg, Natchez, Port Alien, and
Port Orleans and Port of the Deltas, by Potash, Venice, and the Night's Great Gulf, and out.
With the radio on to a mystery program, and as I looked out the window and saw a sign that said
USE COOPER'S PAINT and I said, "Okay, I will." we rolled across the hoodwink night of the
Louisiana plains-Lawtell, Eunice, Kinder, and De Ouincy, western rickety towns becoming more
bayou-like as e reached the Sabine. In Old Opelousas I went into a grocery store to buy bread
and cheese while Dean saw to gas and oil. It was just a shack; I could hear the family eating supper
in the back. I waited a minute; they went on talking. I took bread and cheese and slipped out the
door. We had barely enough money to make Frisco. Meanwhile Dean took a carton of cigarettes
from the gas station and we were stocked for the voyage-gas, oil, cigarettes, and food. Crooks don't
know. He pointed the car straight down the road.
Somewhere near Starks we saw a great red glow in the sky ahead; we wondered what it was; in a
moment we were passing it. It was a fire beyond the trees; there were many cars parked on the
highway. It must have been some kind of fish-fry, and on the other hand it might have been
anything. The country turned strange and dark near Deweyville. Suddenly e were in the swamps.
"Man, do you imagine what it would be like if we found a jazzjoint in these swamps, with great big
black fellas moanin guitar blues and drinkin snakejuice and makin signs at us?"
"Yes!"
There were mysteries around here. The car was going over a dirt road elevated off the swamps that
dropped on both sides and drooped with vines. We passed an apparition; it was a Negro man in a
white shirt walking along with his arms up-spread to the inky firmament. He must have been
praying or calling down a curse. We zoomed right by; I looked out the back window to see his
white eyes. "Whoo!" said Dean. "Look out. We better not stop in this here country." At one point
we got stuck at a crossroads and stopped the car anyway. Dean turned off the headlamps. We were
surrounded by a great forest of viny trees in which we could almost hear the slither of a million
copperheads. The only thing we could see was the red ampere button on the Hudson dashboard.
Marylou squealed with fright. We began laughing maniac laughs to her. We were scared too. We 
wanted to get out of this mansion of the snake, this mireful drooping dark, and zoom on back to
familiar American ground and cowtowns. There was a smell of oil and dead water in the air. This
was a manuscript of the night we couldn't read. An owl hooted. We took a chance on one of the dirt
roads, and pretty soon we were crossing the evil old Sabine River that is responsible for all these
swamps. With amazement we saw great structures of light ahead of us. "Texas! It's Texas!
Beaumont oil town!" Huge oil tanks and refineries loomed like cities in the oily fragrant air.
"I'm glad we got out of there," said Marylou. "Let's play some more mystery programs now."
We zoomed through Beaumont, over the Trinity River at Liberty, and straight for Houston. Now
Dean got talking about his Houston days in 1947. "Hassel! That mad Hassel! I look for him
everywhere I go and I never find him. He used to get us so hung-up in Texas here. We'd drive in
with Bull for groceries and Hassel'd disappear. We'd have to go looking for him in every shooting
gallery in town." We were entering Houston. "We had to look for him in this spade part of town
most of the time. Man, he'd be blasting with every mad cat he could find. One night we lost him
and took a hotel room. We were supposed to bring ice back to Jane because her food was rotting. It
took us two days to find Hassel. I got hung-up myself-1 gunned shopping women in the afternoon,
right here, downtown, supermarkets"-we flashed by in the empty night-"and found a real gone
dumb girl who was out of her mind and just wandering, trying to steal an orange. She was from
Wyoming. Her beautiful body was matched only by her idiot mind. I found her babbling and took
her back to the room. Bull was drunk trying to get this young Mexican kid drunk. Carlo was writing
poetry on heroin. Hassel didn't show up till midnight at the jeep. We found him sleeping in the back
seat. The ice was all melted. Hassel said he took about five sleeping pills. Man, if my memory
could only serve me right the way my mind works I could tell you every detail of the things we did.
Ah, but we know time. Everything takes care of itself. I could close my eyes and this old car would
take care of itself."
In the empty Houston streets of four o'clock in the morning a motorcycle kid suddenly roared
through, all bespangled and bedecked with glittering buttons, visor, slick black jacket, a Texas poet
of the night, girl gripped on his back like a papoose, hair flying, onward-going, singing, "Houston,
Austin, Fort Worth, Dallas-and sometimes Kansas City-and sometimes old Antone, ah-haaaaa!"
They pinpointed out of sight. "Wow! Dig that gone gal on his belt! Let's all blow!" Dean tried to
catch up with them. "Now wouldn't it be fine if we could all get together and have a real going
goofbang together with everybody sweet and fine and agreeable, no> hassles, no infant rise of
protest or body woes misconceptalized or sumpin? Ah! but we know time." He bent to it and
pushed the car.
Beyond Houston his energies, great as they were, gave out and I drove. Rain began to fall just as I
took the wheel. Now we were on the great Texas plain and, as Dean said, "You drive and drive and
you're still in Texas tomorrow night." The rain lashed down. I drove through a rickety little 
cowtown with a muddy main street and found myself in a dead end. "Hey, what do I do?" They
were both asleep. I turned and crawled back through town. There wasn't a soul in sight and not a
single light. Suddenly a horseman in a raincoat appeared in my headlamps. It was the sheriff. He
had a ten-gallon hat, drooping in the torrent. "Which way to Austin?" He told me politely and I
started off. Outside town I suddenly saw two headlamps flaring directly at me in the lashing rain,
Whoops, I thought I was on the wrong side of the road; { eased right and found myself rolling in
the mud; I rolled back to the road. Still the headlamps came straight for me. At the last moment I
realized the other driver was on the wrong side of the road and didn't know it. I swerved at thirty
into the mud; it was flat, no ditch, thank God. The offending car backed up in the downpour. Four
sullen fieldworkers, snuck from their chores to brawl in drinking fields, all white shirts and dirty
brown arms, sat looking at me dumbly in the night. The driver was as drunk as the lot.
He said, "Which way t'Houston?" I pointed my thumb back. I was thunderstruck in the middle of
the thought that they had done this on purpose just to ask directions, as a panhandler advances on
you straight up the sidewalk to bar your way. They gazed ruefully at the floor of their car, where
empty bottles rolled, and clanked away. I started the car; it was stuck in the mud a foot deep. I
sighed in the rainy Texas wilderness.
"Dean," I said, "wake up."
"What?"
"We're stuck in the mud."
"What happened?" I told him. He swore up and down. We put on old shoes and sweaters and
barged out of the car into the driving rain. I put my back on the rear fender and lifted and heaved;
Dean stuck chains under the swishing wheels. In a minute we were covered with mud. We woke up
Marylou to these horrors and made her gun the car while we pushed. The tormented Hudson heaved
and heaved. Suddenly it jolted out and went skidding across the road. Marylou pulled it up just in
time, and we got in. That was that- the work had taken thirty minutes and we were soaked and
miserable.
I fell asleep, all caked with mud; and in the morning when I woke up the mud was solidified and
outside there was snow. We were near Fredericksburg, in the high plains. It was one of the worst
winters in Texas and Western history, when cattle perished like flies in great blizzards and snow fell
on San Francisco and LA. We were all miserable. We wished we were back in New Orleans with
Ed Dunkel. Marylou was driving; Dean was sleeping. She drove with one hand on the wheel and
the other reaching back to me in the back seat. She cooed promises about San Francisco. I slavered
miserably over it. At ten I took the wheel-Dean was out for hours-and drove several hundred dreary
miles across the bushy snows and ragged sage hills. Cowboys went by in baseball caps and
earmuffs, looking for cows. Comfortable little homes with chimneys smoking appeared along the
road at intervals. I wished we could go in for buttermilk and beans in front of the fireplace. 
At Sonora I again helped myself to free bread and cheese while the proprietor chatted with a big
rancher on the other side of the store. Dean huzzahed when he heard it; he was hungry. We couldn't
spend a cent on food. "Yass, yass," said Dean, watching the ranchers loping up and down Sonora
main street, "every one of them is a bloody millionaire, thousand head of cattle, workhands,
buildings, money in the bank. If I lived around here I'd go be an idjit in the sagebrush, I'd be
jackrabbit, I'd lick up the branches, I'd look for pretty cowgirls-hee-hee-hee-hee! Damn! Bam!" He
socked himself. "Yes! Right! Oh me!" We didn't know what he was talking about any more. He
took the wheel and flew the rest of the way across the state of Texas, about five hundred miles,
clear to El Paso, arriving at dusk and not stopping except once when he took all his clothes off, near
Ozona, and ran yipping and leaping naked in the sage. Cars zoomed by and didn't see him. He
scurried back to the car and drove on. "Now Sal, now Marylou, I want both of you to do as I'm
doing, disemburden yourselves of all that clothes-now what's the sense of clothes? now that's what
I'm sayin-and sun your pretty bellies with me. Come on!" We were driving west into the sun; it fell
in through the windshield. "Open your belly as we drive into it." Marylou complied;
unfuddyduddied, so did I. We sat in the front seat, all three. Marylou took out cold cream and
applied it to us for kicks. Every now and then a big truck zoomed by; the driver in high cab caught
a glimpse of a golden beauty sitting naked with two naked men: you could see them swerve a
moment as they vanished in our rear-view window. Great sage plains, snowless now, rolled on.
Soon we were in the orange-rocked Pecos Canyon country. Blue distances opened up in the sky. We
got out of the car to examine an old Indian ruin. Dean did so stark naked. Marylou and I put on our
overcoats. We wandered among the old stones, hooting and howling. Certain tourists caught sight
of Dean naked in the plain but they could not believe their eyes and wobbled on.
Dean and Marylou parked the car near Van Horn and made love while I went to sleep. I woke up
just as we were rolling down the tremendous Rio Grande Valley through Glint and Ysleta to El
Paso. Marylou jumped to the back seat, I jumped to the front seat, and we rolled along. To our left
across the vast Rio Grande spaces were the moorish-red mounts of the Mexican border, the land of
the Tarahumare; soft dusk played on the peaks. Straight ahead lay the distant lights of El Paso and
Juarez, sown in a tremendous valley so big that you could see several railroads puffing at the same
time in every direction, as though it was the Valley of the World. We descended into it. - 
"Clint, Texas!" said Dean. He had the radio on to the Glint station. Every fifteen minutes they
played a record; the rest of the time it was commercials about a high-school correspondence course.
"This program is beamed all over the West," cried Dean excitedly. "Man, I used to listen to it day
and night in reform school and prison. All of us used to write in. You get a high-school diploma by
mail, facsimile thereof, if you pass the test. All the young wranglers in the West, I don't care who, at
one time or another write in for this; it's all they hear; you tune the radio in Sterling, Colorado,
Lusk, Wyoming, I don't care where, you get Glint, Texas, Glint, Texas. And the music is always 
cowboy hillbilly and Mexican, absolutely the worst program in the entire history of the country and
nobody can do anything about it. They have a tremendous beam; they've got the whole land
hogtied." We saw the high antenna beyond the shacks of Glint. "Oh, man, the things I could tell
you!" cried Dean, almost weeping. Eyes bent on Frisco and the Coast, we came into El Paso as it
got dark, broke. We absolutely had to get some money for gas or we'd never make it.
We tried everything. We buzzed the travel bureau, but no one was going west that night. The travel
bureau is where you go for share-the-gas rides, legal in the West. Shifty characters wait with
battered suitcases. We went to the Greyhound bus station to try to persuade somebody to give us
the money instead of taking a bus for the Coast. We were too bashful to approach anyone. We
wandered around sadly. It was cold outside. A college boy was sweating at the sight of luscious
Marylou and trying to look unconcerned. Dean and I consulted but decided we weren't pimps.
Suddenly a crazy dumb young kid, fresh out of reform school, attached himself to us, and he and
Dean rushed out for a beer. "Come on, man, let's go mash somebody on the head and get his
money."
"I dig you, man!" yelled Dean. They dashed off. For a moment I was worried; but Dean only
wanted to dig the streets of El Paso with the kid and get his kicks. Marylou and I waited in the car.
She put her arms around me. I said, "Dammit, Lou, wait till we get to Frisco."
"I don't care. Dean's going to leave me anyway."
 "When are you going back to Denver?" "I don't know. I don't care what I'm doing. Can I go back
east with you?"
"We'll have to get some money in Frisco." "I know where you can get a job in a lunchcart behind
the counter, and I'll be a waitress. I know a hotel where we can stay on credit. We'll stick together.
Gee, I'm sad." "What are you sad about, kid?"
"I'm sad about everything. Oh damn, I wish Dean wasn't so crazy now." Dean came twinkling back,
giggling, and jumped in the car.
"What a crazy cat that was, whoo! Did I dig him! I used to know thousands of guys like that,
they're all the same, their minds work in uniform clockwork, oh, the infinite ramifications, no time,
no time . . ." And he shot up the car, hunched over the wheel, and roared out of El Paso. "We'll just
have to pick up hitchhikers. I'm positive we'll find some. Hup! hup! here we go. Look out!" he
yelled at a motorist, and swung around him, and dodged a truck and bounced over the city limits.
Across the river were the jewel lights of Juarez and the sad dry land and the jewel stars of
Chihuahua. Marylou was watching Dean as she had watched him clear across the country and back,
out of the corner of her eye-with a sullen, sad air, as though she wanted to cut off his head and hide
it in her closet, an envious and rueful love of him so amazingly himself, all raging and sniffy and
crazy-wayed, a smile of tender dotage but also sinister envy that frightened me about her, a love she
knew would never bear fruit because when she looked at his hangjawed bony face with its male 
self-containment and absentmindedness she knew he was too mad. Dean was convinced Marylou
was a whore; he confided in me that she was a pathological liar. But when she watched him like
this it was love too; and when Dean noticed he always turned with his big false flirtatious smile,
with the eyelashes fluttering and the teeth pearly white, while a moment ago he was only dreaming
in his eternity. Then Marylou and I both laughed -and Dean gave no sign of discomfiture, just a
goofy glad grin that said to us, Ain't we gettin our kicks anyway? And that was it.
Outside El Paso, in the darkness, we saw a small huddled figure with thumb stuck out. It was our
promised hitchhiker. We pulled up and backed to his side. "How much money you got, kid?" The
kid had no money; he was about seventeen, pale, strange, with one undeveloped crippled hand and
no suitcase. "Ain't he sweet?" said Dean, turning to me with a serious awe. "Come on in, fella, we'll
take you out-" The kid saw his advantage. He said he had an aunt in Tulare, California, who owned
a grocery store and as soon as we got there he'd have some money for us. Dean rolled on the floor
laughing, it was so much like the kid in North Carolina. "Yes! Yes!" he yelled. "We've all got aunts;
well, let's go, let's see the aunts and the uncles and the grocery stores all the way ALONG that
road!!" And we had a new passenger, and a fine little guy he turned out to be, too. He didn't say a
word, he listened to us. After a minute of Dean's talk he was probably convinced he had joined a
car of madmen. He said he was hitchhiking from Alabama to Oregon, where his home was. We
asked him what he was doing in Alabama.
"I went to visit my uncle; he said he'd have a job for me in a lumber mill. The job fell through, so
I'm comin back home."
"Coin home," said Dean, "goin home, yes, I know, we'll take you home, far as Frisco anyhow." But
we didn't have any money. Then it occurred to me I could borrow five dollars from my old friend
Hal Hingham in Tucson, Arizona. Immediately Dean said it was all settled and we were going to
Tucson. And we did.
We passed Las Cruces, New Mexico, in the night and arrived in Arizona at dawn. I woke up from a
deep sleep to find everybody sleeping like lambs and the car parked God knows where, because I
couldn't see out the steamy windows. I got out of the car. We were in the mountains: there was a
heaven of sunrise, cool purple airs, red mountainsides, emerald pastures in valleys, dew, and
transmuting clouds of gold; on the ground gopher holes, cactus, mesquite. It was time for me to
drive on. I pushed Dean and the kid over and went down the mountain with the clutch in and the
motor off to save gas. In this manner I rolled into Benson, Arizona. It occurred to me that I had a
pocket watch Rocco had just given me for a birthday present, a four-dollar watch. At the gas station
I asked the man if he knew a pawnshop in Benson. It was right next door to the station. I knocked,
someone got up out of bed, and in a minute I had a dollar for the watch. It went into the tank. Now
we had enough gas for Tucson. But suddenly a big pistol-packing trooper appeared, just as I was
ready to pull out, and asked to see my driver's license. "The fella in the back seat has the license," I 
said. Dean and Marylou were sleeping together under the blanket. The cop told Dean to come out.
Suddenly he whipped out his gun and yelled, "Keep your hands up!"
"Offisah," I heard Dean say in the most unctious and ridiculous tones, "offisah, I was only
buttoning my flah." Even the cop almost smiled. Dean came out, muddy, ragged, T-shirted, rubbing
his belly, cursing, looking everywhere for his license and his car papers. The cop rummaged
through our back trunk. All the papers were straight.
"Only checking up," he said with a broad smile. "You can go on now. Benson ain't a bad town
actually; you might enjoy it if you had breakfast here."
"Yes yes yes," said Dean, paying absolutely no attention to him, and drove off. We all sighed with
relief. The police are suspicious when gangs of youngsters come by in new cars without a cent in
their pockets and have to pawn watches. "Oh, they're always interfering," said Dean, "but he was a
much better cop than that rat in Virginia. They try to make headline arrests; they think every car
going by is some big Chicago gang. They ain't got nothin else to do." We drove on to Tucson.
Tucson is situated in beautiful mesquite riverbed country, overlooked by the snowy Catalina range.
The city was one big construction job; the people transient, wild, ambitious, busy, gay; washlines,
trailers; bustling downtown streets with banners; altogether very Californian. Fort Lowell Road, out
where Hingham lived, wound along lovely riverbed trees in the flat desert. We saw Hingham
himself brooding in the yard. He was a writer; he had come to Arizona to work on his book in
peace. He was a tall, gangly, shy satirist who mumbled to you with his head turned away and
always said funny things. His wife and baby were with him in the dobe house, a small one that his
Indian stepfather had built. His mother lived across the yard in her own house. She was an excited
American woman who loved pottery, beads, and books. Hingham had heard of Dean through letters
from New York. We came down on him like a cloud, every one of us hungry, even Alfred, the
crippled hitchhiker. Hingham was wearing an old sweater and smoking a pipe in the keen desert air.
His mother came out and invited us into her kitchen to eat. We cooked noodles in a great pot.
Then we all drove to a crossroads liquor store, where Hingham cashed a check for five dollars and
handed me the money.
There was a brief good-by. "It certainly was pleasant," said Hingham, looking away. Beyond some
trees, across the sand, a great neon sign of a roadhouse glowed red. Hingham always went there for
a beer when he was tired of writing. He was very lonely, he wanted to get back to New York. It was
sad to see his tall figure receding in the dark as we drove away, just like the other figures in New
York and New Orleans: they stand uncertainly underneath immense skies, and everything about
them is drowned. Where go? what do? what for? -sleep. But this foolish gang was bending onward.
9
Outside Tucson we saw another hitchhiker in the dark road. This was an Okie from Bakersfield, 
California, who put down his story. "Hot damn, I left Bakersfield with the travel-bureau car and left
my gui-tar in the trunk of another one and they never showed up-guitar and cowboy duds; you see,
I'm a moo-sician, I was headed for Arizona to play with Johnny Mackaw's Sagebrush Boys. Well,
hell, here I am in Arizona, broke, and m'gui-tar's been stoled. You boys drive me back to
Bakersfield and I'll get the money from my brother. How much you want?" We wanted just enough
gas to make Frisco from Bakersfield, about three dollars. Now we were five in the car. "Evenin,
ma'am," he said, tipping his hat to Marylou, and we were off.
In the middle of the night we overtopped the lights of Palm Springs from a mountain road. At dawn,
in snowy passes, we labored toward the town of Mojave, which was the entryway to the great
Tehachapi Pass. The Okie woke up and told funny stories; sweet little Alfred sat smiling. Okie told
us he knew a man who forgave his wife for shooting him and got her out of prison, only to be shot
a second time. We were passing the women's prison when he told it. Up ahead we saw Tehachapi
Pass starting up. Dean took the wheel and carried us clear to the top of the world. We passed a great
shroudy cement factory in the canyon. Then we started down. Dean cut off the gas, threw in the
clutch, and negotiated every hairpin turn and passed cars and did everything in the books without
the benefit of accelerator. I held on tight. Sometimes the road went up again briefly; he merely
passed cars without a sound, on pure momentum. He knew every rhythm and every kick of a
first-class pass. When it was time to U-turn left around a low stone wall that overlooked the bottom
of the world, he just leaned far over to his left, hands on the wheel, stiff-armed, and carried it that
way; and when the turn snaked to the right again, this time with a cliff on our left, he leaned far to
the right, making Marylou and me lean with him. In this way we floated and flapped down to the
San Joaquin Valley. It lay spread a mile below, virtually the floor of California, green and wondrous
from our aerial shelf. We made thirty miles without using gas.
Suddenly we were all excited. Dean wanted to tell me everything he knew about Bakersfield as we
reached the city limits. He showed me rooming houses where he stayed, railroad hotels, poolhalls,
diners, sidings where he jumped off the engine for grapes, Chinese restaurants where he ate, park
benches where he met girls, and certain places where he'd done nothing but sit and wait around.
Dean's California-wild, sweaty, important, the land of lonely and exiled and eccentric lovers come
to forgather like birds, and the land where everybody somehow looked like broken-down,
handsome, decadent movie actors. "Man, I spent hours on that very chair in front of that drugstore!"
He remembered all-every pinochle game, every woman, every sad night. And suddenly we were
passing the place in the railyards where Terry and I had sat under the moon, drinking wine, on those
bum crates, in October 1947, and I tried to tell him. But he was too excited. "This is where Dunkel
and I spent a whole morning drinking beer, trying to make a real gone little waitress from
Watsonville-no, Tracy, yes, Tracy-and her name was Esmeralda-oh, man, something like that."
Marylou was planning what to do the moment she arrived in Frisco. Alfred said his aunt would give 
him plenty of money up in Tulare.
The Okie directed us to his brother in the flats outside town.
We pulled up at noon in front of a little rose-covered shack, and the Okie went in and talked with
some women. We waited fifteen minutes. "I'm beginning to think this guy has no more money than
I have," said Dean. "We get more hung-up! There's probably nobody in the family that'll give him a
cent after that fool escapade." The Okie came out sheepishly and directed us to town.
"Hot damn, I wisht I could find my brother." He made inquiries. He probably felt he was our
prisoner. Finally we went to a big bread bakery, and the Okie came out with his brother, who was
wearing coveralls and was apparently the truck mechanic inside. He talked with his brother a few
minutes. We waited in the car. Okie was telling all his relatives his adventures and about the loss of
his guitar. But he got the money, and he gave it to us, and we were all set for Frisco. We thanked
him and took off.
Next stop was Tulare. Up the valley we roared. I lay in the back seat, exhausted, giving up
completely, and sometime in the afternoon, while I dozed, the muddy Hudson zoomed by the tents
outside Sabinal where I had lived and loved and worked in the spectral past. Dean was bent rigidly
over the wheel, pounding the rods. I was sleeping when we finally arrived in Tulare; I woke up to
hear the insane details. "Sal, wake up! Alfred found his aunt's grocery store, but do you know what
happened? His aunt shot her husband and went to jail. The store's closed down. We didn't get a cent.
Think of it! The things that happen; the Okie told us the same likewise story, the troubles on all
sides, the complications of events-whee, damn!" Alfred was biting his fingernails. We were turning
off the Oregon road at Madera, and there we made our farewell with little Alfred. We wished him
luck and Godspeed to Oregon. He said it was the best ride he ever had.
It seemed like a matter of minutes when we began rolling in the foothills before Oakland and
suddenly reached a height and saw stretched out ahead of us the fabulous white city of San
Francisco on her eleven mystic hills with the blue Pacific and its advancing wall of potato-patch
fog beyond, and smoke and goldenness in the late afternoon of time. "There she blows!" yelled
Dean. "Wow! Made it! Just enough gas! Give me water! No more land! We can't go any further
'cause there ain't no more land! Now Marylou, darling, you and Sal go immediately to a hotel and
wait for me to contact you in the morning as soon as I have definite arrangements made with
Camille and call up Frenchman about my railroad watch and you and Sal buy the first thing hit
town a paper for the want ads and workplans." And he drove into the Oakland Bay Bridge and it
carried us in. The downtown office buildings were just sparkling on their lights; it made you think
of Sam Spade. When we staggered out of the car on O'Farrell Street and sniffed and stretched, it
was like getting on shore after a long voyage at sea; the slopy street reeled under our feet; secret
chop sueys from Frisco Chinatown floated in the air. We took all our things out of the car and piled
them on the sidewalk. 
Suddenly Dean was saying good-by. He was bursting to see Camille and find out what had
happened. Marylou and I stood dumbly in the street and watched him drive away. "You see what a
bastard he is?" said Marylou. "Dean will leave you out in the cold any time it's in his interest."
"I know," I said, and I looked back east and sighed. We had no money. Dean hadn't mentioned
money. "Where are we going to stay?" We wandered around, carrying our bundles of rags in the
narrow romantic streets. Everybody looked like a broken-down movie extra, a withered starlet;
disenchanted stunt-men, midget auto-racers, poignant California characters with their
end-of-the-continent sadness, handsome, decadent, Casanovaish men, puffy-eyed motel blondes,
hustlers, pimps, whores, masseurs, bellhops-a lemon lot, and how's a man going to make a living
with a gang like that?
10
Nevertheless Marylou had been around these people-not far from the Tenderloin-and a gray-faced
hotel clerk let us have a room on credit. That was the first step. Then we had to eat, and didn't do so
till midnight, when we found a nightclub singer in her hotel room who turned an iron upside down
on a coathanger in the wastebasket and warmed up a can of pork and beans. I looked out the
window at the winking neons and said to myself, Where is Dean and why isn't he concerned about
our welfare? I lost faith in him that year. I stayed in San Francisco a week and had the beatest time
of my life. Marylou and I walked around for miles, looking for food-money. We even visited some
drunken seamen in a flophouse on Mission Street that she knew; they offered us whisky.
In the hotel we lived together two days. I realized that, now Dean was out of the picture, Marylou
had no real interest in me; she was trying to reach Dean through me, his buddy. We had arguments
in the room. We also spent entire nights in bed and I told her my dreams. I told her about the big
snake of the world that was coiled in the earth like a worm in an apple and would someday nudge
up a hill to be thereafter known as Snake Hill and fold out upon the plain, a hundred miles long and
devouring as it went along. I told her this snake was Satan. "What's going to happen?" she
squealed; meanwhile she held me tight.
"A saint called Doctor Sax will destroy it with secret herbs which he is at this very moment cooking
up in his underground shack somewhere in America. It may also be disclosed that the snake is just a
husk of doves; when the snake dies great clouds of seminal-gray doves will flutter out and bring
tidings of peace around the world." I was out of my mind with hunger and bitterness.
One night Marylou disappeared with a nightclub owner. I was waiting for her by appointment in a
doorway across the street, at Larkin and Geary, hungry, when she suddenly stepped out of the foyer
of the fancy apartment house with her girl friend, the nightclub owner, and a greasy old man with a
roll. Originally she'd just gone in to see her girl friend. I saw what a whore she was. She was afraid
to give me the sign, though she saw me in that doorway. She walked on little feet and got in the 
Cadillac and off they went. Now I had nobody, nothing.
I walked around, picking butts from the street. I passed a fish-'n-chips joint on Market Street, and
suddenly the woman in there gave me a terrified look as I passed; she was the proprietress, she
apparently thought I was coming in there with a gun to hold up the joint. I walked on a few feet. It
suddenly occurred to me this was my mother of about two hundred years ago in England, and that I
was her footpad son, returning from gaol to haunt her honest labors in the hashery. I stopped, frozen
with ecstasy on the sidewalk. I looked down Market Street. I didn't know whether it was that or
Canal Street in New Orleans: it led to water, ambiguous, universal water, just as 42nd Street, New
York, leads to water, and you never know where you are. I thought of Ed Dunkel's ghost on Times
Square. I was delirious. I wanted to go back and leer at my strange Dickensian mother in the hash
joint. I tingled all over from head to foot. It seemed I had a whole host of memories leading back to
1750 in England and that I was in San Francisco now only in another life and in another body.
"No," that woman seemed to say with that terrified glance, "don't come back and plague your
honest, hard-working mother. You are no longer like a son to me - and like your father, my first
husband. 'Ere this kindly Greek took pity on me." (The proprietor was a Greek with hairy arms.)
"You are no good, inclined to drunkenness and routs and final disgraceful robbery of the fruits of
my 'umble labors in the hashery. O son! did you not ever go on your knees and pray for deliverance
for all your sins and scoundrel's acts? Lost boy! Depart! Do not haunt my soul; I have done well
forgetting you. Reopen no old wounds, be as if you had never returned and looked in to me-to see
my laboring humilities, my few scrubbed pennies-hungry to grab, quick to deprive, sullen, unloved,
mean-minded son of my flesh. Son! Son!" It made me think of the Big Pop vision in Graetna with
Old Bull. And for just a moment I had reached the point of ecstasy that I always wanted to reach,
which was the complete step across chronological time into timeless shadows, and wonderment in
the bleakness of the mortal realm, and the sensation of death kicking at my heels to move on, with a
phantom dogging its own heels, and myself hurrying to a plank where all the angels dove off and
flew into the holy void of uncreated emptiness, the potent and inconceivable radiancies shining in
bright Mind Essence, innumerable lotus-lands falling open in the magic mothswarm of heaven. I
could hear an indescribable seething roar which wasn't in my ear but everywhere and had nothing
to do with sounds. I realized that I had died and been reborn numberless times but just didn't
remember especially because the transitions from life to death and back to life are so ghostly easy, a
magical action for naught, like falling asleep and waking up again a million times, the utter
casualness and deep ignorance of it. I realized it was only because of the stability of the intrinsic
Mind that these ripples of birth and death took place, like the action of wind on a sheet of pure,
serene, mirror-like water. I felt sweet, swinging bliss, like a big shot of heroin in the mainline vein;
like a gulp of wine late in the afternoon and it makes you shudder; my feet tingled. I thought I was
going to die the very next moment. But I didn't die, and walked four miles and picked up ten long 
butts and took them back to Marylou's hotel room and poured their tobacco in my old pipe and lit
up. I was too young to know what had happened. In the window I smelled all the food of San
Francisco. There were seafood places out there where the buns were hot, and the baskets were good
enough to eat too; where the menus themselves were soft with foody esculence as though dipped in
hot broths and roasted dry and good enough to eat too. Just show me the bluefish spangle on a
seafood menu and I'd eat it; let me smell the drawn butter and lobster claws. There were places
where they specialized in thick red roast beef au jus, or roast chicken basted in wine. There were
places where hamburgs sizzled on grills and the coffee was only a nickel. And oh, that pan-fried
chow mein flavored air that blew into my room from Chinatown, vying with the spaghetti sauces of
North Beach, the soft-shell crab of Fisherman's Wharf-nay, the ribs of Fillmore turning on spits!
Throw in the Market Street chili beans, redhot, and french-fried potatoes of the Embarcadero wino
night, and steamed clams from Sausalito across the bay, and that's my ah-dream of San Francisco.
Add fog, hunger-making raw fog, and the throb of neons in the soft night, the clack of high-heeled
beauties, white doves in a Chinese grocery window . . .
11
That was the way Dean found me when he finally decided I was worth saving. He took me home to
Camille's house. "Where's Marylou, man?"
"The whore ran off." Camille was a relief after Marylou; a well-bred, polite young woman, and she
was aware of the fact that the eighteen dollars Dean had sent her was mine. But O where went thou,
sweet Marylou? I relaxed a few days in Camille's house. From her living-room window in the
wooden tenement on Liberty Street you could see all of San Francisco burning green and red in the
rainy night. Dean did the most ridiculous thing of his career the few days I was there. He got a job
demonstrating a new kind of pressure cooker in the kitchens of homes. The salesman gave him
piles of samples and pamphlets. The first day Dean was a hurricane of energy. I drove all over town
with him as he made appointments. The idea was to get invited socially to a dinner party and then
leap up and start demonstrating the pressure cooker. "Man," cried Dean excitedly, "this is even
crazier than the time I worked for Sinah. Sinah sold encyclopedias in Oakland. Nobody could turn
him down. He made long speeches, he jumped up and down, he laughed, he cried. One time we
broke into an Okie house where everybody was getting ready to go to a funeral. Sinah got down on
his knees and prayed for the deliverance of the deceased soul. All the Okies started crying. He sold
a complete set of encyclopedias. He was the maddest guy in the world. I wonder where he is. We
used to get next to pretty young daughters and feel them up in the kitchen. This afternoon I had the
gonest housewife in her little kitchen-arm around her, demonstrating. Ah! Hmm! Wow!"
"Keep it up, Dean," I said. "Maybe someday you'll be mayor of San Francisco." He had the whole
cookpot spiel worked out; he practiced on Camille and me in the evenings. One morning he stood 
naked, looking at all San Francisco out the window as the sun came up. He looked like someday
he'd be the pagan mayor of San Francisco. But his energies ran out. One rainy afternoon the
salesman came around to find out what Dean was doing. Dean was sprawled on the couch. "Have
you been trying to sell these?" "No," said Dean, "I have another job coming up." "Well, what are
you going to do about all these samples?" "I don't know." In a dead silence the salesman gathered
up his sad pots and left. I was sick and tired of everything and so was Dean.
But one night we suddenly went mad together again; we went to see Slim Gaillard in a little Frisco
nightclub. Slim Gaillard is a tall, thin Negro with big sad eyes who's always saying, "Right-orooni"
and "How 'bout a little bourbonThe last night Dean went mad and found Marylou somewhere downtown and we got in the car and
drove all over Richmond across the bay, hitting Negro jazz shacks in the oil flats. Marylou went to
sit down and a colored guy pulled the chair out from under her. The gals approached her in the John
with propositions. I was approached too. Dean was sweating around. It was the end; I wanted to get
out.
At dawn I got my New York bus and said good-by to Dean and Marylou. They wanted some of my
sandwiches. I told them no. It was a sullen moment. We were all thinking we'd never see one
another again and we didn't care.
PART THREE
1
In the spring of 1949 I had a few dollars saved from my GI education checks and I went to Denver,
thinking of settling down there. I saw myself in Middle America, a patriarch. I was lonesome.
Nobody was there-no Babe Rawlins, Ray Rawlins, Tim Gray, Betty Gray, Roland Major, Dean
Moriarty, Carlo Marx, Ed Dunkel, Roy Johnson, Tommy Snark, nobody. I wandered around Curtis
Street and Larimer Street, worked awhile in the wholesale fruit market where I almost got hired in
1947-the hardest job of my life; at one point the Japanese kids and I had to move a whole boxcar a
hundred feet down the rail by hand with a jack-jet that made it move a quarter-inch with each yank.
I lugged watermelon crates over the ice floor of reefers into the blazing sun, sneezing. In God's
name and under the stars, what| for?
At dusk I walked. I felt like a speck on the surface of the sad red earth. I passed the Windsor Hotel,
where Dean Moriarty had lived with his father in the depression thirties, and as of yore I looked
everywhere for the sad and fabled tinsmith of my mind. Either you find someone who! looks like
your father in places like Montana or you look] for a friend's father where he is no more.
At lilac evening I walked with every muscle aching] among the lights of 27th and Welton in the
Denver colored | section, wishing I were a Negro, feeling that the best the] white world had offered
was not enough ecstasy for me, not  enough life, joy, kicks, darkness, music, not enough night. I 
stopped at a little shack where a man sold hot red chili in ' paper containers; I bought some and ate
it, strolling in the : dark mysterious streets. I wished I were a Denver Mexican, or even a poor
overworked Jap, anything but what I was so drearily, a "white man" disillusioned. All my life I'd
had white ambitions; that was why I'd abandoned a good woman like Terry in the San Joaquin
Valley I passed the dark porches of Mexican and Negro homes; soft voices were there, occasionally
the dusky knee of some mysterious sensual gal; and dark faces of the men behind rose arbors. Little
children sat like sages in ancient rocking chairs. A gang of colored women came by, and one of the
young ones detached herself from motherlike elders and came to me fast-"Hello Joe!" -and
suddenly saw it wasn't Joe, and ran back, blushing. I wished I were Joe. I was only myself, Sal
Paradise, sad, strolling in this violet dark, this unbearably sweet night, wishing I could exchange
worlds with the happy, true-hearted, ecstatic | Negroes of America. The raggedy neighborhoods
reminded] me of Dean and Marylou, who knew these streets so well from] childhood. How I
wished I could find them.
Down at 23rd and Welton a softball game was going on| under floodlights which also illuminated
the gas tank. A great 1 eager crowd roared at every play. The strange young heroes of all kinds,
white, colored, Mexican, pure Indian, were on the field, performing with heart-breaking seriousness.
Just sandlot kids in uniform. Never in my life as an athlete had I ever permitted myself to perform
like this in front of families and girl friends and kids of the neighborhood, at night, under lights;
always it had been college, big-time, sober-faced; no boyish, human joy like this. Now it was too
late. Near me sat an old Negro who apparently watched the games every night. Next to him was an
old white bum; then a Mexican family, then some girls, some boys-all humanity, the lot. Oh, the
sadness of the lights that night! The young pitcher looked just like Dean. A pretty blonde in the
seats looked just like Marylou. It was the Denver Night; all I did was die.
Down in Denver, down in Denver All I did was die
Across the street Negro families sat on their front steps, talking and looking up at the starry night
through the trees and just relaxing in the softness and sometimes watching the game. Many cars
passed in the street meanwhile, and stopped at the corner when the light turned red. There was
excitement and the air was filled with the vibration of really joyous life that knows nothing of
disappointment and "white sorrows" and all that. The old Negro man had a can of beer in his coat
pocket, which he proceeded to open; and the old white man enviously eyed the can and groped in
his pocket to see if he could buy a can too. How I died! I walked away from there.
I went to see a rich girl I knew. In the morning she pulled a hundred-dollar bill out of her silk
stocking and said, "You've been talking of a trip to Frisco; that being the case, take this and go and
have your fun." So all my problems were solved and I got a travel-bureau car for eleven dollars'
gas-fare to Frisco and zoomed over the land.
Two fellows were driving this car; they said they were pimps. Two other fellows were passengers 
with me. We sat tight and bent our minds to the goal. We went over Berthoud Pass, down to the
great plateau, Tabernash, Troublesome, Kremmling; down Rabbit Ears Pass to Steamboat Springs,
and j out; fifty miles of dusty detour; then Craig and the Great) American Desert. As we crossed the
Colorado-Utah border 11 saw God in the sky in the form of huge gold sunburning clouds above the
desert that seemed to point a finger at me and say, "Pass here and go on, you're on the road to
heaven." 1 Ah well, alackaday, I was more interested in some old rotted! covered wagons and pool
tables sitting in the Nevada desert] near a Coca-Cola stand and where there were huts with the!
weatherbeaten signs still napping in the haunted shrouded 1 desert wind, saying, "Rattlesnake Bill
lived here" or "Broken-j mouth Annie holed up here for years." Yes, zoom! In Salt! Lake City the
pimps checked on their girls and we drove on. I Before I knew it, once again I was seeing the
fabled city of] San Francisco stretched on the bay in the middle of the night. I I ran immediately to
Dean. He had a little house now. I was! burning to know what was on his mind and what would
hap- j pen now, for there was nothing behind me any more, all my I bridges were gone and I didn't
give a damn about anything at ] all. I knocked on his door at two o'clock in the morning.
2
He came to the door stark naked and it might have been the President knocking for all he cared. He
received the world in the raw. "Sal!" he said with genuine awe. "I didn't think you'd actually do it.
You've finally come to me."
"Yep," I said. "Everything fell apart in me. How are things with you?"
"Not so good, not so good. But we've got a million things to talk about. Sal, the time has finally
come for us to talk and get with it." We agreed it was about time and went in. My arrival was
somewhat like the coming of the strange most evil angel in the home of the snow-white fleece, as
Dean and I began talking excitedly in the kitchen downstairs, which brought forth sobs from
upstairs. Everything I said to Dean was answered with a wild, whispering, shuddering "Yes!"
Camille knew what was going to happen. Apparently Dean had been quiet for a few months; now
the angel had arrived and he was going mad again. "What's the matter with her?" I whispered. He
said, "She's getting worse and worse, man, she cries and makes tantrums, won't let me out to see
Slim Gaillard, gets mad every time I'm late, then when I stay home she won't talk to me and says
I'm an utter beast." He ran upstairs to soothe her. I heard Camille yell, "You're a liar, you're a liar,
you're a liar!" I took the opportunity to examine the very wonderful house they had. It was a
two-story crooked, rickety wooden cottage in the middle of tenements, right on top of Russian Hill
with a view of the bay; it had four rooms, three upstairs and one immense sort of basement kitchen
downstairs. The kitchen door opened onto a grassy court where washlines were. In back of the
kitchen was a storage room where Dean's old shoes still were caked an inch thick with Texas mud
from the night the Hudson got stuck on the Brazos River. Of course the Hudson was gone; Dean 
hadn't been able to make further payments on it. He had no car at all now. Their second baby was
accidentally coming. It was horrible to hear Camille sobbing so. We couldn't stand it and went out
to buy beer and brought it back to the kitchen. Camille finally went to sleep or spent the night
staring blankly at the dark. I had no idea-what was really wrong, except perhaps Dean had driven
her mad after all.
After my last leaving of Frisco he had gone crazy over Marylou again and spent months haunting
her apartment on Divisadero, where every night she had a different sailor in and he peeked down
through her mail-slot and could see her bed. There he saw Marylou sprawled in the mornings with
a-boy. He trailed her around town. He wanted absolute proof that she was a whore. He loved her, he
sweated over her. Finally he got hold of some bad green, as it's called in the trade -green, uncured
marijuana-quite by mistake, and smoked too much of it.
"The first day," he said, "I lay rigid as a board in bed and couldn't move or say a word; I just looked
straight up with my eyes open wide. I could hear buzzing in my head and saw all kinds of
wonderful technicolor visions and felt wonderful. The second day everything came to me,
EVERYTHING I'd eve done or known or read or heard of or conjectured came to me and
rearranged itself in my mind in a brand-new logical i way and because I could think of nothing else
in the interior concerns of holding and catering to the amazement and gratitude I felt, I kept saying,
'Yes, yes, yes, yes.' Not loud. 'Yes,' real quiet, and these green tea visions lasted until the| third day.
I had understood everything by then, my life was decided, I knew I loved Marylou, I knew I had to
fir my father wherever he is and save him, I knew you were buddy et cetera, I knew how great
Carlo is. I knew a thousand| things about everybody everywhere. Then the third day began having a
terrible series of waking nightmares, and the were so absolutely horrible and grisly and green that I
lay there doubled up with my hands around my knees, saying, 'Oh, oh, oh, ah, oh . . .' The
neighbors heard me and sent for a doctor. Camille was away with the baby, visiting hot| folks. The
whole neighborhood was concerned. They came in| and found me lying on the bed with my arms
stretched out forever. Sal, I ran to Marylou with some of that tea. And do you know that the same
thing happened to that dumb little box?-the same visions, the same logic, the same final decision
about everything, the view of all truths in one painful In leading to nightmares and pain-ack! Then I
knew I loved her so much I wanted to kill her. I ran home and beat my head on the wall. I ran to Ed
Dunkel; he's back in Frisco with Galatea; I asked him about a guy we know has a gun, I went the
guy, I got the gun, I ran to Marylou, I looked down mail-slot, she was sleeping with a guy, had to
retreat and he hesitate, came back in an hour, I barged in, she was alone-and gave her the gun and
told her to kill me. She held the gun her hand the longest time. I asked her for a sweet dead pact.
She didn't want. I said one of us had to die. She said no. I beat my head on the wall. Man, I was out
of my mind. She'll tell you, she talked me out of it."
"Then what happened?" 
"That was months ago-after you left. She finally married a used-car dealer, dumb bastit has
promised to kill me if he finds me, if necessary I shall have to defend myself and kill him and I'll
go to San Quentin, 'cause, Sal, one more rap of any kind and I go to San Quentin for life-that's the
end of me. Bad hand and all." He showed me his hand. I hadn't noticed in the excitement that he
had suffered a terrible accident to his hand. "I Ht Marylou on the brow on February twenty-sixth at
six o'clock in the evening-in fact six-ten, because I remember I had to make my hotshot freight in
an hour and twenty minutes-the last time we met and the last time we decided everything, and now
listen to this: my thumb only deflected off her brow and she didn't even have a bruise and in fact
laughed, but my thumb broke above the wrist and a horrible doctor made a setting of the bones that
was difficult and took three separate castings, twenty-three combined hours of sitting on hard
benches waiting, et cetera, and the final cast had a traction pin stuck through the tip of my thumb,
so in April when they took off the cast the pin infected my bone and I developed osteomyelitis
which has become chronic, and after an operation which failed and a month in a cast the result was
the amputation of a wee bare piece off the tip-ass end."
He unwrapped the bandages and showed me. The flesh, about half an inch, was missing under the
nail.
"It got from worse to worse. I had to support Camille and Amy and had to work as fast as I could at
Firestone as mold man, curing recapped tires and later hauling big hunnerd-fifty-pound tires from
the floor to the top of the cars-could only use my good hand and kept banging the bad-broke it
again, had it reset again, and it's getting all infected and swoled again. So now I take care of baby
while Camille works. You see? Heeby-jeebies, I'm classification three-A, jazz-hounded Mori-arty
has a sore butt, his wife gives him daily injections of penicillin for his thumb, which produces hives,
for he's allergic. He must take sixty thousand units of Fleming's juice within a month. He must take
one tablet every four hours for this month to combat allergy produced from his juice. He must take
codeine aspirin to relieve the pain in his thumb. He must have surgery on his leg for an inflamed
cyst. He must rise next Monday at six A.M. to get his teeth cleaned. He must see a foot doctor twice
a week for treatment. He must take cough syrup each night. He must blow and snort constantly to
clear his nose, which has collapsed just under the bridge where an operation some years ago
weakened it. He lost his thumb on his throwing arm. Greatest seventy-yard passer in the history of
New Mexico State Reformatory. And yet-and yet, I've never felt better and finer and happier with
the world and to see little lovely children playing in the sun and I am so glad to see you, my fine
gone wonderful Sal, and I know, I know everything will be all right. You'll see her tomorrow, my
terrific darling beautiful daughter can now stand alone for thirty seconds at a time, she weighs
twenty-two pounds, is twenty-nine inches long. I've just figured out she is
thirty-one-and-a-quarter-per-cent English, twenty-seven-and-a-half-per-cent Irish,
twenty-five-per-cent German, eight-and-three-quarters-per-cent Dutch, seven-and-a-half-per-cent 
Scotch, one-hun-dred-per-cent wonderful." He fondly congratulated me for the book I had finished,
which was now accepted by the publishers. "We know life, Sal, we're growing older, each of us,
little by little, and are coming to know things. What you tell me about your life I understand well,
I've always dug your feelings, and now in fact you're ready to hook up with a real great girl if you
can only find her and cultivate her and make her mind your soul as I have tried so hard with these
damned women of mine. Shit! shit! shit!" he yelled.
And in the morning Camille threw both of us out, baggage and all. It began when we called Roy
Johnson, old Denver Roy, and had him come over for beer, while Dean minded the baby and did
the dishes and the wash in the backyard but did a sloppy job of it in his excitement. Johnson agreed
to drive us to Mill City to look for Remi Boncoeur. Camille came in from work at the doctor's
office and gave us all the sad look of a harassed woman's life. I tried to show this haunted woman
that I had no mean intentions concerning her home life by saying hello to her and talking as warmly
as I could, but she knew it was a con and maybe one I'd learned from Dean, and only gave a brief
smile. In the morning there was a terrible scene: she lay on the bed sobbing, and in the midst of this
I suddenly had the need to go to the bathroom, and the only way I could get there was through her
room. "Dean, Dean," I cried, "where's the nearest bar?"
"Bar?" he said, surprised; he was washing his hands in the kitchen sink downstairs. He thought I
wanted to get drunk. I told him my dilemma and he said, "Go right ahead, she does that all the
time." No, I couldn't do that. I rushed out to look for a bar; I walked uphill and downhill in a
vicinity of four blocks on Russian Hill and found nothing but laundromats, cleaners, soda fountains,
beauty parlors. I came back to the crooked little house. They were yelling at each other as I slipped
through with a feeble smile and locked myself in the bathroom. A few moments later Camille was
throwing Dean's things on the living-room floor and telling him to pack. To my amazement I saw a
full-length oil painting of Galatea Dunkel over the sofa. I suddenly realized that all these women
were spending months of loneliness and womanliness together, chatting about the madness of the
men. I heard Dean's maniacal giggle across the house, together with the wails of his baby. The next
thing I knew he was gliding around the house like Groucho Marx, with his broken thumb wrapped
in a huge white bandage sticking up like a beacon that stands motionless above the frenzy of the
waves. Once again I saw his pitiful huge battered trunk with socks and dirty underwear sticking
out; he bent over it, throwing in everything he could find. Then he got his suitcase, the beatest
suitcase in the USA. It was made of paper with designs on it to make it look like leather, and hinges
of some kind pasted on. A great rip ran down the top; Dean lashed on a rope. Then he grabbed his
seabag and threw things into that. I got my bag, stuffed it, and as Camille lay in bed saying, "Liar!
Liar! Liar!" we leaped out of the house and struggled down the street to the nearest cable car-a
mass of men and suitcases with that enormous bandaged thumb sticking up in the air.
That thumb became the symbol of Dean's final development. He no longer cared about anything (as 
before) but now he also cared about everything in principle; that is to say, it was all the same to him
and he belonged to the world and there was nothing he could do about it. He stopped me in the
middle of the street.
"Now, man, I know you're probably real bugged; you just got to town and we get thrown out the
first day and you're wondering what I've done to deserve this and so on-together with all horrible
appurtenances-hee-hee-hee!-but look at me. Please, Sal, look at me."
I looked at him. He was wearing a T-shirt, torn pants hanging down his belly, tattered shoes; he had
not shaved, his hair was wild and bushy, his eyes bloodshot, and that tremendous bandaged thumb
stood supported in midair at heart-level (he had to hold it up that way), and on his face was the
goofiest grin I ever saw. He stumbled around in a circle and looked everywhere.
"What do my eyeballs see? Ah-the blue sky. Long-fellow!" He swayed and blinked. He rubbed his
eyes. "Together with windows-have you ever dug windows? Now let's talk about windows. I have
seen some really crazy windows that made faces at me, and some of them had shades drawn and so
they winked." Out of his seabag he fished a copy of Eugene Sue's Mysteries of Paris and, adjusting
the front of his T-shirt, began reading on the street corner with a pedantic air. "Now really, Sal, let's
dig everything as we go along . . ." He forgot about that in an instant and looked around blankly. I
was glad I had come, he needed me now.
"Why did Camille throw you out? What are you going to do?"
"Eh?" he said. "Eh? Eh?" We racked our brains for where to go and what to do. I realized it was up
to me. Poor, poor Dean-the devil himself had never fallen farther; in idiocy, with infected thumb,
surrounded by the battered suitcases of his motherless feverish life across America and back
numberless times, an undone bird. "Let's walk to New York," he said, "and as we do so let's take
stock of everything along the way -yass." I took out my money and counted it; I showed it to him.
"I have here," I said, "the sum of eighty-three dollars and change, and if you come with me let's go
to New York-and after that let's go to Italy."
"Italy?" he said. His eyes lit up. "Italy, yass-how shall we get there, dear Sal?"
I pondered this. "I'll make some money, I'll get a thousand dollars from the publishers. We'll go dig
all the crazy women in Rome, Paris, all those places; we'll sit at sidewalk cafes; we'll live in
whorehouses. Why not go to Italy?"
"Why yass," said Dean, and then realized I was serious and looked at me out of the corner of his
eye for the first time, for I'd never committed myself before with regard to his burdensome
existence, and that look was the look of a man weighing his chances at the last moment before the
bet. There were triumph and insolence in his eyes, a devilish look, and he never took his eyes off
mine for a long time. I looked back at him and blushed.
I said, "What's the matter?" I felt wretched when I asked it. He made no answer but continued
looking at me with the same wary insolent side-eye. 
I tried to remember everything he'd done in his life and if there wasn't something back there to
make him suspicious of something now. Resolutely and firmly I repeated what I said
-"Come to New York with me; I've got the money." I looked at him; my eyes were watering with
embarrassment and tears. Still he stared at me. Now his eyes were blank and looking through me. It
was probably the pivotal point of our friendship when he realized I had actually spent some hours
thinking about him and his troubles, and he was trying to place that in his tremendously involved
and tormented mental categories. Something clicked in both of us. In me it was suddenly concern
for a man who was years younger than I, five years, and whose fate was wound with mine across
the passage of the recent years; in him it was a matter that I can ascertain only from what he did
afterward. He became extremely joyful and said everything was settled. "What was that look?" I
asked. He was pained to hear me say that. He frowned. It was rarely that Dean frowned. We both
felt perplexed and uncertain of something. We were standing on top of a hill on a beautiful sunny
day in San Francisco; our shadows fell across the sidewalk. Out of the tenement next to Camille's
house filed eleven Greek men and women who instantly lined themselves up on the sunny
pavement while another backed up across the narrow street and smiled at them over a camera. We
gaped at these ancient people who were having a wedding party for one of their daughters,
probably the thousandth in an unbroken dark generation of smiling in the sun. They were well
dressed, and they were strange. Dean and I might have been in Cyprus for all of that. Gulls flew
overhead in the sparkling air.
"Well," said Dean in a very shy and sweet voice, "shall we go?"
"Yes," I said, "let's go to Italy." And so we picked up our bags, he the trunk with his one good arm
and I the rest, and staggered to the cable-car stop; in a moment rolled down the hill with our legs
dangling to the sidewalk from the jiggling shelf, two broken-down heroes of the Western night.
3
First thing, we went to a bar down on Market Street and decided everything-that we would stick
together and be buddies till we died. Dean was very quiet and preoccupied, looking at the old bums
in the saloon that reminded him of his father. "I think he's in Denver-this time we must absolutely
find him, he may be in County Jail, he may be around Larimer Street again, but he's to be found.
Agreed?"
Yes, it was agreed; we were going to do everything we'd never done and had been too silly to do in
the past. Then we promised ourselves two days of kicks in San Francisco before starting off, and of
course the agreement was to go by travel bureau in share-the-gas cars and save as much money as
possible. Dean claimed he no longer needed Marylou though he still loved her. We both agreed he
would make out in New York.
Dean put on his pin-stripe suit with a sports shirt, we stashed our gear in a Greyhound bus locker 
for ten cents, and we took off to meet Roy Johnson who was going to be our chauffeur for two-day
Frisco kicks. Roy agreed over the phone to do so. He arrived at the corner of Market and Third
shortly thereafter and picked us up. Roy was now living in Frisco, working as a clerk and married
to a pretty little blonde called Dorothy. Dean confided that her nose was too long-this was his big
point of contention about her, for some strange reason-but her nose wasn't too long at all. Roy
Johnson is a thin, dark, handsome kid with a pin-sharp face and combed hair that he keeps shoving
back from the sides of his head. He had an extremely earnest approach and a big smile. Evidently
his wife, Dorothy, had wrangled with him over the chauffeuring idea-and, determined to make a
stand as the man of the house (they lived in a little room), he nevertheless stuck by his promise to
us, but with consequences; his mental dilemma resolved itself in a bitter silence. He drove Dean
and me all over Frisco at all hours of day and night and never said a word; all he did was go
through red lights and make sharp turns on two wheels, and this was telling us the shifts to which
we'd put him. He was midway between the challenge of his new wife and the challenge of his old
Denver poolhall gang leader. Dean was pleased, and of course unperturbed by the driving. We paid
absolutely no attention to Roy and sat in the back and yakked.
The next thing was to go to Mill City to see if we could find Remi Boncoeur. I noticed with some
wonder that the old ship Admiral Freebee was no longer in the bay; and then of course Remi was
no longer in the second-to-last compartment of the shack in the canyon. A beautiful colored girl
opened the door instead; Dean and I talked to her a great deal. Roy Johnson waited in the car,
reading Eugene Sue's Mysteries of Paris. I took one last look at Mill City and knew there was no
sense trying to dig up the involved past; instead we decided to go see Galatea Dunkel about
sleeping accommodations. Ed had left her again, was in Denver, and damned if she still didn't plot
to get him back. We found her sitting crosslegged on the Oriental-type rug of her four-room
tenement flat on upper Mission with a deck of fortune cards. Good girl. I saw sad signs that Ed
Dunkel had lived here awhile and then left out of stupors and disinclinations only.
"He'll come back," said Galatea. "That guy can't take care of himself without me." She gave a
furious look at Dean and Roy Johnson. "It was Tommy Snark who did it this time. All the time
before he came Ed was perfectly happy and worked and we went out and had wonderful times.
Dean, you know that. Then they'd sit in the bathroom for hours, Ed in the bathtub and Snarky on
the seat, and talk and talk and talk- such silly things."
Dean laughed. For years he had been chief prophet of that gang and now they were learning his
technique. Tommy Snark had grown a beard and his big sorrowful blue eyes had come looking for
Ed Dunkel in Frisco; what happened (actually and no lie), Tommy had his small ringer amputated
in a Denver mishap and collected a good sum of money. For no reason under the sun they decided
to give Galatea the slip and go to Portland, Maine, where apparently Snark had an aunt. So they
were now either in Denver, going through, or already in Portland. 
"When Tom's money runs out Ed'll be back," said Galatea, looking at her cards. "Damn fool-he
doesn't know anything and never did. All he has to do is know that I love him."
Galatea looked like the daughter of the Greeks with the sunny camera as she sat there on the rug,
her long hair streaming to the floor, plying the fortune-telling cards. I got to like her. We even
decided to go out that night and hear jazz, and Dean would take a six-foot blonde who lived down
the street, Marie.
That night Galatea, Dean, and I went to get Marie. This girl had a basement apartment, a little
daughter, and an old car that barely ran and which Dean and I had to push down the street as the
girls jammed at the starter. We went to Galatea's, and there everybody sat around-Marie, her
daughter, Galatea, Roy Johnson, Dorothy his wife-all sullen in the overstaffed furniture as I stood
in a corner, neutral in Frisco problems, and Dean stood in the middle of the room with his
balloon-thumb in the air breast-high, giggling. "Gawd damn," he said, "we're all losing our
fingers-hawr-hawr-hawr."
"Dean, why do you act so foolish?" said Galatea. "Camille called and said you left her. Don't you
realize you have a daughter?"
"He didn't leave her, she kicked him out!" I said, breaking my neutrality. They all gave me dirty
looks; Dean grinned. "And with that thumb, what do you expect the poor guy to do?" I added. They
all looked at me; particularly Dorothy Johnson lowered a mean gaze on me. It wasn't anything but a
sewing circle, and the center of it was the culprit, Dean- responsible, perhaps, for everything that
was wrong. I looked out the window at the buzzing night-street of Mission; I wanted to get going
and hear the great jazz of Frisco-and remember, this was only my second night in town.
"I think Marylou was very, very wise leaving you, Dean," said Galatea. "For years now you haven't
had any sense of responsibility for anyone. You've done so many awful things I don't know what to
say to you."
And in fact that was the point, and they all sat around looking at Dean with lowered and hating eyes,
and he stood on the carpet in the middle of them and giggled-he just giggled. He made a little dance.
His bandage was getting dirtier all the time; it began to flop and unroll. I suddenly realized that
Dean, by virtue of his enormous series of sins, was becoming the Idiot, the Imbecile, the Saint of
the lot.
"You have absolutely no regard for anybody but yourself and your damned kicks. All you think
about is what's hanging between your legs and how much money or fun you can get out of people
and then you just throw them aside. Not only that but you're silly about it. It never occurs to you
that life is serious and there are people trying to make something decent out of it instead of just
goofing all the time."
That's what Dean was, the HOLY GOOF.
"Camille is crying her heart out tonight, but don't think for a minute she wants you back, she said 
she never wanted to see you again and she said it was to be final this time. Yet you stand here and
make silly faces, and I don't think there's a care in your heart."
This was not true; I knew better and I could have told them all. I didn't see any sense in trying it. I
longed to go and put my arm around Dean and say, Now look here, all of you, remember just one
thing: this guy has his troubles too, and another thing, he never complains and he's given all of you
a damned good time just being himself, and if that isn't enough for you then send him to the firing
squad, that's apparently what you're itching to do anyway . . .
Nevertheless Galatea Dunkel was the only one in the gang who wasn't afraid of Dean and could sit
there calmly, with her face hanging out, telling him off in front of everybody. There were earlier
days in Denver when Dean had everybody sit in the dark with the girls and just talked, and talked,
and talked, with a voice that was once hypnotic and strange and was said to make the girls come
across by sheer force of persuasion and the content of what he said. This was when he was fifteen,
sixteen. Now his disciples were married and the wives of his disciples had him on the carpet for the
sexuality and the life he had helped bring into being. I listened further.
"Now you're going East with Sal," Galatea said, "and what do you think you're going to accomplish
by that? Camille has to stay home and mind the baby now you're gone-how can she keep her
job?-and she never wants to see you again and I don't blame her. If you see Ed along the road you
tell him to come back to me or I'll kill him "
Just as flat as that. It was the saddest night. I felt as if I was with strange brothers and sisters in a
pitiful dream. Then a complete silence fell over everybody; where once Dean would have talked his
way out, he now fell silent himself, but standing in front of everybody, ragged and broken and
idiotic, right under the lightbulbs, his bony mad face covered with sweat and throbbing veins,
saying, "Yes, yes, yes," as though tremendous revelations were pouring into him all the time now,
and I am convinced they were, and the others suspected as much and were frightened. He was
BEAT-the root, the soul of Beatific. What was he knowing? He tried all in his power to tell me what
he was knowing, and they envied that about me, my position at his side, defending him and
drinking him in as they once tried to do. Then they looked at me. What was I, a stranger, doing on
the West Coast this fair night? I recoiled from the thought.
"We're going to Italy," I said, I washed my hands of the whole matter. Then, too, there was a strange
sense of maternal satisfaction in the air, for the girls were really looking at Dean the way a mother
looks at the dearest and most errant child, and he with his sad thumb and all his revelations knew it
well, and that was why he was able, in tick-tocking silence, to walk out of the apartment without a
word, to wait for us downstairs as soon as we'd made up our minds about time. This was what we
sensed about the ghost on the sidewalk. I looked out the window. He was alone in the doorway,
digging the street. Bitterness, recriminations, advice, morality, sadness-everything was behind him,
and ahead of him was the ragged and ecstatic joy of pure being. 
"Come on, Galatea, Marie, let's go hit the jazz joints and forget it. Dean will be dead someday.
Then what can you say to him?"
"The sooner he's dead the better," said Galatea, and she spoke officially for almost everyone in the
room.
"Very well, then," I said, "but now he's alive and I'll bet you want to know what he does next and
that's because he's got the secret that we're all busting to find and it's splitting his head wide open
and if he goes mad don't worry, it won't be your fault but the fault of God."
They objected to this; they said I really didn't know Dean; they said he was the worst scoundrel that
ever lived and I'd find out someday to my regret. I was amused to hear them protest so much. Roy
Johnson rose to the defense of the ladies and said he knew Dean better than anybody, and all Dean
was, was just a very interesting and even amusing con-man. I went out to find Dean and we had a
brief talk about it.
"Ah, man, don't worry, everything is perfect and fine." He was rubbing his belly and licking his
lips.
4
The girls came down and we started out on our big night, once more pushing the car down the
street. "Wheeoo! let's go!" cried Dean, and we jumped in the back seat and clanked to the little
Harlem on Folsom Street.
Out we jumped in the warm, mad night, hearing a wild tenorman bawling horn across the way,
going "EE-YAH! EE-YAH! EE-YAH!" and hands clapping to the beat and folks yelling, "Go, go,
go!" Dean was already racing across the street with his thumb in the air, yelling, "Blow, man,
blow!" A bunch of colored men in Saturday-night suits were whooping it up in front. It was a
sawdust saloon with a small bandstand on which the fellows huddled with their hats on, blowing
over people's heads, a crazy place; crazy floppy sponren wandered around sometimes in their
bathrobes, bottles clanked in alleys. In back of the joint in a dark corridor beyond the splattered
toilets scores of men and women stood against the wall drinking wine-spodiodi and spitting at the
stars-wine and whisky. The behatted tenorman was blowing at the peak of a wonderfully
satisfactory free idea, a rising and falling riff that went from "EE-yah!" to a crazier
"EE-de-lee-yah!" and blasted along to the rolling crash of butt-scarred drums hammered by a big
brutal Negro with a bullneck who didn't give a damn about anything but punishing his busted tubs,
crash, rattle-ti-boom, crash. Uproars of music and the tenorman had it and everybody knew he had
it. Dean was clutching his head in the crowd, and it was a mad crowd. They were all urging that
tenorman to hold it and keep it with cries and wild eyes, and he was raising himself from a crouch
and going down again with his horn, looping it up in a clear cry above the furor. A six-foot skinny
Negro woman was rolling her bones at the man's hornbell, and he just jabbed it at her, "Ee! ee! ee!" 
Everybody was rocking and roaring. Galatea and Marie with beer in their hands were standing on
their chairs, shaking and jumping. Groups of colored guys stumbled in from the street, falling over
one another to get there. "Stay with it, man!" roared a man with a foghorn voice, and let out a big
groan that must have been heard clear out in Sacramento, ah-haa! "Whoo!" said Dean. He was
rubbing his chest, his belly; the sweat splashed from his face. Boom, kick, that drummer was
kicking his drums down the cellar and rolling the beat upstairs with his murderous sticks,
rattlety-boom! A big fat man was jumping on the platform, making it sag and creak. "Yoo!" The
pianist was only pounding the keys with spread-eagled fingers, chords, at intervals when the great
tenorman was drawing breath for another blast-Chinese chords, shuddering the piano in every
timber, chink, and wire, boing! The tenorman jumped down from the platform and stood in the
crowd, blowing around; his hat was over his eyes; somebody pushed it back for him. He just hauled
back and stamped his foot and blew down a hoarse, baughing blast, and drew breath, and raised the
horn and blew high, wide, and screaming in the air. Dean was directly in front of him with his face
lowered to the bell of the horn, clapping his hands, pouring sweat on the man's keys, and the man
noticed and laughed in his horn a long quivering crazy laugh, and everybody else laughed and they
rocked and rocked; and finally the tenorman decided to blow his top and crouched down and held a
note in high C for a long time as everything else crashed along and the cries increased and I thought
the cops would come swarming from the nearest precinct. Dean was in a trance. The tenorman's
eyes were fixed straight on him; he had a madman who not only understood but cared and wanted
to understand more and much more than there was, and they began dueling for this; everything
came out of the horn, no more phrases, just cries, cries, "Baugh" and down to "Beep!" and up to
"EEEEE!" and down to clinkers and over to sideways-echoing horn-sounds. He tried everything, up,
down, sideways, upside down, horizontal, thirty degrees, forty degrees, and finally he fell back in
somebody's arms and gave up and everybody pushed around and yelled, "Yes! Yes! He blowed that
one!" Dean wiped himself with his handkerchief.
Then up stepped the tenorman on the bandstand and asked for a slow beat and looked sadly out the
open door over people's heads and began singing "Close Your Eyes." Things quieted down a minute.
The tenorman wore a tattered suede jacket, a purple shirt, cracked shoes, and zoot pants without
press; he didn't care. He looked like a Negro Hassel. His big brown eyes were concerned with
sadness, and the singing of songs slowly and with long, thoughtful pauses. But in the second chorus
he got excited and grabbed the mike and jumped down from the bandstand and bent to it. To sing a
note he had to touch his shoetops and pull it all up to blow, and he blew so much he staggered from
the effect, and only recovered himself in time for the next long slow note. "Mu-u-u-usic
pla-a-a-a-a-a-ay!" He leaned back with his face to the ceiling, mike held below. He shook, he
swayed. Then he leaned in, almost falling with his face against the mike. "Ma-a-a-ake it dream-y
for dan-cing"-and he looked at the street outside with his lips curled in scorn, Billie Holiday's hip 
sneer-"while we go ro-man-n-n-cing"-he staggered sideways-"Lo-o-o-ove's holi-da-a-ay"-he shook
his head with disgust and weariness at the whole world-"Will make it seem"-what would it make it
seem? everybody waited; he mourned-"O-kay." The piano hit a chord. "So baby come on just
clo-o-o-ose your pretty little ey-y-y-y-yes"-his mouth quivered, he looked at us, Dean and me, with
an expression that seemed to say, Hey now, what's this thing we're all doing in this sad brown
world?- and then he came to the end of his song, and for this there had to be elaborate preparations,
during which time you could send all the messages to Garcia around the world twelve times and
what difference did it make to anybody? because here we were dealing with the pit and prunejuice
of poor beat life itself in the god-awful streets of man, so he said it and sang it, "Close-your-" and
blew it way up to the ceiling and through to the stars and on out-"Ey-y-y-y-y-y-es"-and staggered
off the platform to brood. He sat in the corner with a bunch of boys and paid no attention to them.
He looked down and wept. He was the greatest.
Dean and I went over to talk to him. We invited him out to the car. In the car he suddenly yelled,
"Yes! ain't nothin I like better than good kicks! Where do we go?" Dean jumped up and down in the
seat, giggling maniacally. "Later! later!" said the tenorman. "I'll get my boy to drive us down to
Jamson's Nook, I got to sing. Man, I live to sing. Been singin 'Close Your Eyes' for two weeks-I
don't want to sing nothin else. What are you boys up to?" We told him we were going to New York
in two days. "Lord, I ain't never been there and they tell me it's a real jumpin town but I ain't got no
cause complainin where I am. I'm married, you know."
"Oh yes?" said Dean, lighting up. "And where is the darling tonight?"
"What do you mean?" said the tenorman, looking at him out of the corner of his eye. "I tole you I
was married to her, didn't I?"
"Oh yes, oh yes," said Dean. "I was just asking. Maybe she has friends? or sisters? A ball, you know,
I'm just looking for a ball."
"Yah, what good's a ball, life's too sad to be ballin all the time," said the tenorman, lowering his eye
to the street. "Shh-eee-it!" he said. "I ain't got no money and I don't care tonight."
We went back in for more. The girls were so disgusted with Dean and me for gunning off and
jumping around that they had left and gone to Jamson's Nook on foot; the car wouldn't run anyway.
We saw a horrible sight in the bar: a white hipster fairy had come in wearing a Hawaiian shirt and
was asking the big drummer if he could sit in. The musicians looked at him suspiciously. "Do you
blow?" He said he did, mincing. They looked at one another and said, "Yeah, yeah, that's what the
man does, shhh-ee-it!" So the fairy sat down at the tubs and they started the beat of a jump number
and he began stroking the snares with soft goofy bop brushes, swaying his neck with that
complacent Reichianalyzed ecstasy that doesn't mean anything except too much tea and soft foods
and goofy kicks on the cool order. But he didn't care. He smiled joyously into space and kept the
beat, though softly, with bop subtleties, a giggling, rippling background for big solid foghorn blues 
the boys were blowing, unaware of him. The big Negro bullneck drummer sat waiting for his turn.
"What that man doing?" he said. "Play the music!" he said. "What in hell!" he said. "Shh-ee-eet!"
and looked away, disgusted.
The tenorman's boy showed up; he was a little taut Negro with a great big Cadillac. We all jumped
in. He hunched over the wheel and blew the car clear across Frisco without stopping once, seventy
miles an hour, right through traffic and nobody even noticed him, he was so good. Dean was in
ecstasies. "Dig this guy, man! dig the way he sits there and don't move a bone and just balls that
jack and can talk all night while he's doing it, only thing is he doesn't bother with talking, ah, man,
the things, the things I could-I wish-oh, yes. Let's go, let's not stop-go now! Yes!" And the boy
wound around a corner and bowled us right in front of Jamson's Nook and was parked. A cab pulled
up; out of it jumped a skinny, withered little Negro preacherman who threw a dollar at the cabby
and yelled, "Blow!" and ran into the club and dashed right through the downstairs bar, yelling,
"Blowblowblow!" and stumbled upstairs, almost falling on his face, and blew the door open and
fell into the jazz-session room with his hands out to support him against anything he might fall on,
and he fell right on Lampshade, who was working as a waiter in Jamson's Nook that season, and
the music was there blasting and blasting and he stood transfixed in the open door, screaming,
"Blow for me, man, blow!" And the man was a little short Negro with an alto horn that Dean said
obviously lived with his grandmother just like Tom Snark, slept all day and blew all night, and blew
a hundred choruses before he was ready to jump for fair, and that's what he was doing.
"It's Carlo Marx!" screamed Dean above the fury.
And it was. This little grandmother's boy with the taped-up alto had beady, glittering eyes; small,
crooked feet; spindly legs; and he hopped and flopped with his horn and threw his feet around and
kept his eyes fixed on the audience (which was just people laughing at a dozen tables, the room
thirty by thirty feet and low ceiling), and he never stopped. He was very simple in his ideas. What
he liked was the surprise of a new simple variation of a chorus. He'd go from "ta-tup-tader-rara . . .
ta-tup-tader-rara," repeating and hopping to it and kissing and smiling into his horn, to
"ta-tup-EE-da-de-dera-RUP! ta-tup-EE-da-de-dera-RUP!" and it was all great moments of laughter
and understanding for him and everyone else who heard. His tone was clear as a bell, high, pure,
and blew straight in our faces from two feet away. Dean stood in front of him, oblivious to
everything else in the world, with his head bowed, his hands socking in together, his whole body
jumping on his heels and the sweat, always the sweat, pouring and splashing down his tormented
collar to lie actually in a pool at his feet. Galatea and Marie were there, and it took us five minutes
to realize it. Whoo, Frisco nights, the end of the continent and the end of doubt, all dull doubt and
tomfoolery, good-by. Lampshade was roaring around with his trays of beer; everything he did was
in rhythm; he yelled at the waitress with the beat; "Hey now, babybaby, make a way, make a way,
it's Lampshade comin your way," and he hurled by her with the beers in the air and roared through 
the swinging doors into the kitchen and danced with the cooks and came sweating back. The
hornman sat absolutely motionless at a corner table with an untouched drink in front of him, staring
gook-eyed into space, his hands hanging at his sides till they almost touched the floor, his feet
outspread like lolling tongue his body shriveled into absolute weariness and entranced sorrow and
what-all was on his mind: a man who knocked self out every evening and let the others put the
quietus him in the night. Everything swirled around him like a cloud.| And that little grandmother's
alto, that little Carlo Marx hopped and monkeydanced with his magic horn and blew two hundred
choruses of blues, each one more frantic than the! other, and no signs of failing energy or
willingness to call any-| thing a day. The whole room shivered.
On the corner of Fourth and Folsom an hour later I stood 1 with Ed Fournier, a San Francisco alto
man who waited with! me while Dean made a phone call in a saloon to have Roy I Johnson pick us
up. It wasn't anything much, we were just I talking, except that suddenly we saw a very strange and
insane sight. It was Dean. He wanted to give Roy Johnson the I address of the bar, so he told him to
hold the phone a minute ] and ran out to see, and to do this he had to rush pellmell through a long
bar of brawling drinkers in white shirtsleeves, go to the middle of the street, and look at the post
signs. He did this, crouched low to the ground like Groucho Marx, his feet carrying him with
amazing swiftness out of the bar, like an apparition, with his balloon thumb stuck up in the night,
and came to a whirling stop in the middle of the road, looking everywhere above him for the signs.
They were hard to see in the dark, and he spun a dozen times in the road, thumb upheld, in a wild,
anxious silence, a wild-haired person with a ballooning thumb held up like a great goose of the sky,
spinning and spinning in the dark, the other hand distractedly inside his pants. Ed Fournier was
saying, "I blow a sweet tone wherever I go and if people don't like it ain't nothin I can do about it.
Say, man, that buddy of yours is a crazy cat, looka him over there"-and we looked. There was a big
silence everywhere as Dean saw the signs and rushed back in the bar, practically going under
someone's legs as they came out and gliding so fast through the bar that everybody had to do a
double take to see him. A moment later Roy Johnson showed up, and with the same amazing
swiftness. Dean glided across the street and into the car, without a sound. We were off again.
"Now, Roy, I know you're all hung-up with your wife about this thing but we absolutely must make
Forty-sixth and Geary in the incredible time of three minutes or everything is lost. Ahem! Yes!
(Cough-cough.) In the morning Sal and I are leaving for New York and this is absolutely our last
night of kicks and I know you won't mind."
No, Roy Johnson didn't mind; he only drove through every red light he could find and hurried us
along in our foolishness. At dawn he went home to bed. Dean and I had ended up with a colored
guy called Walter who ordered drinks at the bar and had them lined up and said, "Wine-spodiodi!"
which was a shot of port wine, a shot of whisky, and a shot of port wine. "Nice sweet jacket for all
that bad whisky!" he yelled. 
He invited us to his home for a bottle of beer. He lived in the tenements in back of Howard. His
wife was asleep when we came in. The only light in the apartment was the bulb over her bed. We
had to get up on a chair and unscrew the bulb as she lay smiling there; Dean did it, fluttering his
lashes. She was about fifteen years older than Walter and the sweetest woman in the world. Then
we had to plug in the extension over her bed, and she smiled and smiled. She never asked Walter
where he'd been, what time it was, nothing. Finally we were set in the kitchen with the extension
and sat down around the humble table to drink the beer and tell the stories. Dawn. It was time to
leave and move the extension back to the bedroom and screw back the bulb. Walter's wife smiled
and smiled as we repeated the insane thing all over again. She never said a word.
Out on the dawn street Dean said, "Now you see, man, there's real woman for you. Never a harsh
word, never a complaint, or modified; her old man can come in any hour of the night with anybody
and have talks in the kitchen and drink the beer and leave any old time. This is a man, and that's his
castle." He pointed up at the tenement. We stumbled off. The big night was over, A cruising car
followed us suspiciously for a few blocks. We bought fresh doughnuts in a bakery on Third Street
and ate them in the gray, ragged street. A tall, bespectacled, well-dressed fellow came stumbling
down the street with a Negro in a truck-driving cap. They were a strange pair. A big truck rolled by
and the Negro pointed at it excitedly and tried to express his feeling. The tall white man furtively
looked over his shoulder and counted his money. "It's Old Bull Lee!" giggled Dean. "Counting his
money and worried about everything, and all that other boy wants to do is talk about trucks and
things he knows." We followed them awhile.
Holy flowers floating in the air, were all these tired faces in the dawn of Jazz America.
We had to sleep; Galatea Dunkel's was out of the question. Dean knew a railroad brakeman called
Ernest Burke who lived with his father in a hotel room on Third Street. Originally he'd been on
good terms with them, but lately not so, and the idea was for me to try persuading them to let us
sleep on their floor. It was horrible. I had to call from a morning diner. The old man answered the
phone suspiciously. He remembered me from what his son had told him. To our surprise he came
down to the lobby and let us in. It was just a sad old brown Frisco hotel. We went upstairs and the
old man was kind enough to give us the entire bed. "I have to get up anyway," he said and retired to
the little kitchenette to brew coffee. He began telling stories about his railroading days. He
reminded me of my father. I stayed up and listened to the stories. Dean, not listening, was washing
his teeth and bustling around and saying, "Yes, that's right," to everything he said. Finally we slept;
and in the morning Ernest came back from a Western Division run and took the bed as Dean and I
got up. Now old Mr. Burke dolled himself up for a date with his middle-aged sweetheart. He put on
a green tweed suit, a cloth cap, also green tweed, and stuck a flower in his lapel.
"These romantic old broken-down Frisco brakemen live sad but eager lives of their own," I told
Dean in the toilet. "It was very kind of him to let us sleep here." 
"Yass, yass," said Dean, not listening. He rushed out to get a travel-bureau car. My job was to hurry
to Galatea Dunkel's for our bags. She was sitting on the floor with her fortune-telling cards.
"Well, good-by, Galatea, and I hope everything works out fine."
"When Ed gets back I'm going to take him to Jamson's Nook every night and let him get his fill of
madness. Do you think that'll work, Sal? I don't know what to do."
"What do the cards say?"
"The ace of spades is far away from him. The heart cards always surround him-the queen of hearts
is never far. See this jack of spades? That's Dean, he's always around."
"Well, we're leaving for New York in an hour."
"Someday Dean's going to go on one of these trips and never come back."
She let me take a shower and shave, and then I said good-by and took the bags downstairs and
hailed a Frisco taxi-jitney, which was an ordinary taxi that ran a regular route and you could hail it
from any corner and ride to any corner you want for about fifteen cents, cramped in with other
passengers like on a bus, but talking and telling jokes like in a private car. Mission Street that last
day in Frisco was a great riot of construction work, children playing, whooping Negroes coming
home from work, dust, excitement, the great buzzing and vibrating hum of what is really America's
most excited city- and overhead the pure blue sky and the joy of the foggy sea that always rolls in
at night to make everybody hungry for food and further excitement. I hated to leave; my stay had
lasted sixty-odd hours. With frantic Dean I was rushing through the world without a chance to see it.
In the afternoon we were buzzing toward Sacramento and eastward again.
5
The car belonged to a tall, thin fag who was on his way home to Kansas and wore dark glasses and
drove with extreme care; the car was what Dean called a "fag Plymouth"; it had no pickup and no
real power. "Effeminate car!" whispered Dean in my ear. There were two other passengers, a couple,
typical halfway tourist who wanted to stop and sleep everywhere. The first stop would have to be
Sacramento, which wasn't even the faintest beginning of the trip to Denver. Dean and I sat alone in
the back seat and left it up to them and talked. "Now, man, that alto man last night had IT-he held it
once he found it; I've never seen a guy who could hold so long." I wanted to know what "IT" meant.
"Ah well"- Dean laughed-"now you're asking me impon-de-rables- ahem! Here's a guy and
everybody's there, right? Up to him to put down what's on everybody's mind. He starts the first
chorus, then lines up his ideas, people, yeah, yeah, but get it, and then he rises to his fate and has to
blow equal to it. All of a sudden somewhere in the middle of the chorus he gets it- everybody looks
up and knows; they listen; he picks it up and carries. Time stops. He's filling empty space with the
substance of our lives, confessions of his bellybottom strain, remembrance of ideas, rehashes of old
blowing. He has to blow across bridges and come back and do it with such infinite feeling 
soul-exploratory for the tune of the moment that everybody knows it's not the tune that counts but
IT-" Dean could go no further; he was sweating telling about it.
Then I began talking; I never talked so much in all my life. I told Dean that when I was a kid and
rode in cars I used to imagine I held a big scythe in my hand and cut down all the trees and posts
and even sliced every hill that zoomed past the window. "Yes! Yes!" yelled Dean. "I used to do it
too only different scythe-tell you why. Driving across the West with the long stretches my scythe
had to be immeasurably longer and it had to curve over distant mountains, slicing off their tops, and
reach another level to get at further mountains and at the same time clip off every post along the
road, regular throbbing poles. For this reason-O man, I have to tell you, NOW, I have IT-I have to
tell you the time my father and I and a pisspoor bum from Larimer Street took a trip to Nebraska in
the middle of the depression to sell flyswatters. And how we made them, we bought pieces of
ordinary regular old screen and pieces of wire that we twisted double and little pieces of blue and
red cloth to sew around the edges and all of it for a matter of cents in a five-and-ten and made
thousands of flyswatters and got in the old bum's jalopy and went clear around Nebraska to every
farmhouse and sold them for a nickel apiece-mostly for charity the nickels were given us, two bums
and a boy, apple pies in the sky, and my old man in those days was always singing 'Hallelujah, I'm a
bum, bum again.' And man, now listen to this, after two whole weeks of incredible hardship and
bouncing around and hustling in the heat to sell these awful makeshift flyswatters they started to
argue about the division of the proceeds and had a big fight on the side of the road and then made
up and bought wine and began drinking wine and didn't stop for five days and five nights while I
huddled and cried in the background, and when they were finished every last cent was spent and we
were right back where we started from, Larimer Street. And my old man was arrested and I had to
plead at court to the judge to let him go cause he was my pa and I had no mother. Sal, I made great
mature speeches at the age of eight in front of interested lawyers . . ." We were hot; we were going
east; we were excited.
"Let me tell you more," I said, "and only as a parenthesis within what you're saying and to conclude
my last thought. As a child lying back in my father's car in the back seat I also had a vision of
myself on a white horse riding alongside over every possible obstacle that presented itself: this
included dodging posts, hurling around houses, sometimes jumping over when I looked too late,
running over hills, across sudden squares with traffic that I had to dodge through incredibly-" "Yes!
Yes! Yes!" breathed Dean ecstatically. "Only difference with me was, I myself ran, I had no horse.
You were a Eastern kid and dreamed of horses; of course we won't assume such things as we both
know they are really dross and literary ideas, but merely that I in my perhaps wilder schizophrenia
actually ran on foot along the car and at incredible speeds sometimes ninety, making it over every
bush and fence and farmhouse and sometimes taking quick dashes to the hills and back without
losing a moment's ground . . ." 
We were telling these things and both sweating. We had completely forgotten the people up front
who had begun to wonder what was going on in the back seat. At one point the driver said, "For
God's sakes, you're rocking the boat back there." Actually we were; the car was swaying as Dean
and I both swayed to the rhythm and the IT of our final excited joy in talking and living to the
blank tranced end of all innumerable riotous angelic particulars that had been lurking in our souls
all our lives.
"Oh, man! man! man!" moaned Dean. "And it's not even the beginning of it-and now here we are at
last going east together, we've never gone east together, Sal, think of it, we'll dig Denver together
and see what everybody's doing although that matters little to us, the point being that we know
what IT is and we know TIME and we know that everything is really FINE." Then he whispered,
clutching my sleeve, sweating, "Now you just dig them in front. They have worries, they're
counting the miles, they're thinking about where to sleep tonight, how much money for gas, the
weather, how they'll get there-and all the time they'll get there anyway, you see. But they need to
worry and betray time with urgencies false and otherwise, purely anxious and whiny, their souls
really won't be at peace unless they can latch on to an established and proven worry and having
once found it they assume facial expressions to fit and go with it, which is, you see, unhappiness,
and all the time it all flies by them and they know it and that too worries them no end. Listen!
Listen! 'Well now,' " he mimicked, " 'I don't know-maybe we shouldn't get gas in that station. I read
recently in National Petroffious Petroleum News that this kind of gas has a great deal of O-Octane
gook in it and someone once told me it even had semi-official high-frequency cock in it, and I don't
know, well I just don't feel like it anyway . . .' Man, you dig all this." He was poking me furiously
in the ribs to understand. I tried my wildest best. Bing, bang, it was all Yes! Yes! Yes! in the back
seat and the people up front were mopping their brows with fright and wishing they'd never picked
us up at the travel bureau. It was only the beginning, too.
In Sacramento the fag slyly bought a room in a hotel and invited Dean and me to come up for a
drink, while the couple went to sleep at relatives', and in the hotel room Dean tried everything in
the book to get money from the fag. It was insane. The fag began by saying he was very glad we
had come along because he liked young men like us, and would we believe it, but he really didn't
like girls and had recently concluded an affair with a man in Frisco in which he had taken the male
role and the man the female role. Dean plied him with businesslike questions and nodded eagerly.
The fag said he would like nothing better than to know what Dean thought about all this. Warning
him first that he had once been a hustler in his youth, Dean asked him how much money he had. I
was in the bathroom. The fag became extremely sullen and I think suspicious of Dean's final
motives, turned over no money, and made vague promises for Denver. He kept counting his money
and checking on his wallet. Dean threw up his hands and gave up. "You see, man, it's better not to
bother. Offer them what they secretly want and they of course immediately become panic-stricken." 
But he had sufficiently conquered the owner of the Plymouth to take over the wheel without
remonstrance, and now we really traveled.
We left Sacramento at dawn and were crossing the Nevada desert by noon, after a hurling passage
of the Sierras that made the fag and the tourists cling to each other in the back seat. We were in
front, we took over. Dean was happy again. All he needed was a wheel in his hand and four on the
road. He talked about how bad a driver Old Bull Lee was and to demonstrate-"Whenever a huge
big truck like that one coming loomed into sight it would take Bull infinite time to spot it, 'cause he
couldn't see, man, he can't see." He rubbed his eyes furiously to show. "And I'd say, 'Whoop, look
out, Bull, a truck,' and he'd say, 'Eh? what's that you say, Dean?' 'Truck! truck!' and at the very last
moment he would go right up to the truck like this-" And Dean hurled the Plymouth head-on at the
truck roaring our way, wobbled and hovered in front of it a moment, the truckdriver's face growing
gray before our eyes, the people in the back seat subsiding in gasps of horror, and swung away at
the last moment. "Like that, you see, exactly like that, how bad he was." I wasn't scared at all; I
knew Dean. The people in the back seat were speechless. In fact they were afraid to complain: God
knew what Dean would do, they thought, if they should ever complain. He balled right across the
desert in this manner, demonstrating various ways of how not to drive, how his father used to drive
jalopies, how great drivers made curves, how bad drivers hove over too far in the beginning and
had to scramble at the curve's end, and so on. It was a hot, sunny afternoon. Reno, Battle Mountain,
Elko, all the towns along the Nevada road shot by one after another, and at dusk we were in the Salt
Lake flats with the lights of Salt Lake City infinitesimally glimmering almost a hundred miles
across the mirage of the flats, twice showing, above and below the curve of the earth, one clear, one
dim. I told Dean that the thing that bound us all together in this world was invisible, and to prove it
pointed to long lines of telephone poles that curved off out of sight over the bend of a hundred
miles of salt. His floppy bandage, all dirty now, shuddered in the air, his face was a light. "Oh yes,
man, dear God, yes, yes!" Suddenly he stopped the car and collapsed. I turned and saw him huddled
in the corner of the seat, sleeping. His face was down on his good hand, and the bandaged hand
automatically and dutifully remained in the air.
The people in the back seat sighed with relief. I heard them -whispering mutiny. "We can't let him
drive any more, he's absolutely crazy, they must have let him out of an asylum or something."
I rose to Dean's defense and leaned back to talk to them. "He's not crazy, he'll be all right, and don't
worry about his driving, he's the best in the world."
"I just can't stand it," said the girl in a suppressed, hysterical whisper. I sat back and enjoyed
nightfall on the desert and waited for poorchild Angel Dean to wake up again. We were on a hill
overlooking Salt Lake City's neat patterns of light and he opened his eyes to the place in this
spectral world where he was born, unnamed and bedraggled, years ago.
"Sal, Sal, look, this is where I was born, think of it! People change, they eat meals year after year 
and change with every meal. EE! Look!" He was so excited it made me cry. Where would it all
lead? The tourists insisted on driving the car the rest of the way to Denver. Okay, we didn't care. We
sat in the back and talked. But they got too tired in the morning and Dean took the wheel in the
eastern Colorado desert at Craig. We had spent almost the entire night crawling cautiously over
Strawberry Pass in Utah and lost a lot of time. They went to sleep. Dean headed pellmell for the
mighty wall of Berthoud Pass that stood a hundred miles ahead on the roof of the world, a
tremendous Gibraltarian door shrouded in clouds. He took Berthoud Pass like a June bug-same as
at Tehachapi, cutting off the motor and floating it, passing everybody and never halting the
rhythmic advance that the mountains themselves intended, till we overlooked the great hot plain of
Denver again-and Dean was home.
It was with a great deal of silly relief that these people let us off the car at the corner of ayth and
Federal. Our battered suitcases were piled on the sidewalk again; we had longer ways to go. But no
matter, the road is life.
6
Now we had a number of circumstances to deal with in Denver, and they were of an entirely
different order from those of 1947. We could either get another travel-bureau car at once or stay a
few days for kicks and look for his father.
We were both exhausted and dirty. In the John of a restaurant I was at a urinal blocking Dean's way
to the sink and I stepped, out before I was finished and resumed at another urinal, and said to Dean,
"Dig this trick."
"Yes, man," he said, washing his hands at the sink, "it's a very good trick but awful on your kidneys
and because you're getting a little older now every time you do this eventually years of misery in
your old age, awful kidney miseries for the days when you sit in parks."
It made me mad. "Who's old? I'm not much older than you are!"
"I wasn't saying that, man!"
"Ah," I said, "you're always making cracks about my age. I'm no old fag like that fag, you don't
have to warn me about! my kidneys." We went back to the booth and just as the waitress set down
the hot-roast-beef sandwiches-and ordinarily Dean would have leaped to wolf the food at once-I
said to cap my anger, "And I don't want to hear any more of it."  And suddenly Dean's eyes grew
tearful and he got up and left his food steaming there and walked out of the restaurant. I wondered
if he was just wandering off forever. I didn't care, = I was so mad-I had nipped momentarily and
turned it down i on Dean. But the sight of his uneaten food made me sadder than anything in years.
I shouldn't have said that ... he likes to eat so much . . . He's never left his food like this . . . What
the hell. That's showing him, anyway.
Dean stood outside the restaurant for exactly five minutes and then came back and sat down. 
"Well," I said, "what were you doing out there, knotting up your fists? Cursing me, thinking up new
gags about my kidneys?"
Dean mutely shook his head. "No, man, no, man, you're all completely wrong. If you want to know,
well-"
"Go ahead, tell me." I said all this and never looked up from my food. I felt like a beast.
"I was crying," said Dean.
"Ah hell, you never cry."
"You say that? Why do you think I don't cry?"
"You don't die enough to cry." Every one of these things I said was a knife at myself. Everything I
had ever secretly held against my brother was coming out: how ugly I was and what filth I was
discovering in the depths of my own impure psychologies.
Dean was shaking his head. "No, man, I was crying."
"Go on, I bet you were so mad you had to leave."
"Believe me, Sal, really do believe me if you've ever believed anything about me." I knew he was
telling the truth and yet I didn't want to bother with the truth and when I looked up at him I think I
was cockeyed from cracked intestinal twistings in my awful belly. Then I knew I was wrong.
"Ah, man, Dean, I'm sorry, I never acted this way before with you. Well, now you know me. You
know I don't have close relationships with anybody any more-I don't know what to do with these
things. I hold things in my hand like pieces of crap and don't know where to put it down. Let's
forget it." The holy con-man began to eat. "It's not my fault! it's not my fault!" I told him. "Nothing
in this lousy world is my fault, don't you see that? I don't want it to be and it can't be and it won't
be."
"Yes, man, yes, man. But please harken back and believe me."
"I do believe you, I do." This was the sad story of that afternoon. All kinds of tremendous
complications arose that night when Dean and I went to stay with the Okie family. These had been
neighbors of mine in my Denver solitude of two weeks before. The mother was a wonderful woman
in jeans who drove coal trucks in winter mountains to support her kids, four in all, her husband
having left her years before when they were traveling around the country in a trailer. They had
rolled all the way from Indiana to LA in that trailer. After many a good time and a big
Sunday-afternoon drunk in crossroads bars and laughter and guitar-playing in the night, the big lout
had suddenly walked off across the dark field and never returned. Her children were wonderful.
The eldest was a boy, who wasn't around that summer but in a camp in the mountains; next was a
lovely thirteen-year-old daughter who wrote poetry and picked flowers in the fields and wanted to
grow up and be an actress in Hollywood, Janet by name; then came the little ones, little Jimmy who
sat around the campfire at night and cried for his "pee-tater" before it was half roasted, and little
Lucy who made pets of worms, horny toads, beetles, and anything that crawled, and gave them 
names and places to live. They had four dogs. They lived their ragged and joyous lives on the little
new-settlement street and were the butt of the neighbors' semi-respectable sense of propriety only
because the poor woman's husband had left her and because they littered up the yard. At night all
the lights of Denver lay like a great wheel on the plain below, for the house was in that part of the
West where the mountains roll down foothilling to the plain and where in primeval times soft
waves must have washed from sea-like Mississippi to make such round and perfect stools for the
island-peaks like Evans and Pike and Longs. Dean went there and of course he was all sweats and
joy at the sight of them, especially Janet, but I warned him not to touch her, and probably didn't
have to. The woman was a great man's woman and took to Dean right away but she was bashful
and he was bashful. She said Dean reminded her of the husband gone. "Just like him-oh, he was a
crazy one, I tell ya!"
The result was uproarious beer-drinking in the littered living room, shouting suppers, and booming
Lone Ranger radio.
The complications rose like clouds of butterflies: the woman -Frankie, everyone called her-was
finally about to buy a jalopy as she had been threatening to do for years, and had recently come into
a few bucks toward one. Dean immediately took over the responsibility of selecting and naming the
price of the car, because of course he wanted to use it himself so as of yore he could pick up girls
coming out of high school in the afternoons and drive them up to the mountains. Poor innocent
Frankie was always agreeable to anything. But she was afraid to part with her money when they got
to the car lot and stood before the salesman. Dean sat right down in the dust of Alameda Boulevard
and beat his fists on his head. "For a hunnerd you carft get anything better!" He swore he'd never
talk to her again, he cursed till his face was purple, he was about to jump in the car and drive k
away anyway. "Oh these dumb dumb dumb Okies, they'll never change, how completely and how
unbelievably dumb, the moment it comes time to act, this paralysis, scared, hysterical, nothing
frightens em more than what they want-it's my father my father my father all over again!"
Dean was very excited that night because his cousin Sam Brady was meeting us at a bar. He was
wearing a clean T-shirt and beaming all over. "Now listen, Sal, I must tell you about Sam-he's my
cousin." "By the way, have you looked for your father?" "This afternoon, man, I went down to
Jiggs' Buffet where he used to pour draft beer in tender befuddlement and get hell from the boss
and go staggering out-no-and I went to the old barbershop next to the Windsor-no, not there- old
fella told me he thought he was-imagine!-working in a railroad gandy-dancing cookshack or
sumpin for the Boston and Maine in New England! But I don't believe him, they make up fractious
stories for a dime. Now listen to hear. In my childhood Sam Brady my close cousin was my
absolute hero. He used to bootleg whisky from the mountains and one time he had a tremendous
fist fight with his brother that lasted two hours in the yard and had the women screaming and
terrified. We used to sleep together. The one man in the family who took tender concern for me. 
And tonight I'm I going to see him again for the first time in seven years, he  just got back from
Missouri."
"And what's the pitch?"
"No pitch, man, I only want to know what's been happening in the family-I have a family,
remember-and most; particularly, Sal, I want him to tell me things that I've forgot- -, ten in my
childhood. I want to remember, remember, I do!"  I never saw Dean so glad and excited. While we
waited for: his cousin in the bar he talked to a lot of younger downtown < hipsters and hustlers and
checked on new gangs and goings-on. Then he made inquiries after Marylou, since she'd been in
Denver recently. "Sal, in my young days when I used to come to this corner to steal change off the
newsstand for bowery beef stew, that rough-looking cat you see out there standing had nothing but
murder in his heart, got into one horrible fight after another, I remember his scars even, till now
years and y-e-a-r-s of standing on the corner have finally softened him and chastened him ragely,
here completely he's become sweet and willing and patient with everybody, he's become a fixture
on the corner, you see how things happen?"
Then Sam arrived, a wiry, curly-haired man of thirty-five with work-gnarled hands. Dean stood in
awe before him.' "No," said Sam Brady, "I don't drink any more."
"See? See?" whispered Dean in my ear. "He doesn't drink any more and he used to be the biggest
whiskyleg in town, he's got religion now, he told me over the phone, dig him,-dig the change in a
man-my hero has become so strange." Sam Brady was suspicious of his young cousin. He took us
out for a spin in his old rattly coupe and immediately he made his position clear in regard to Dean.
"Now look, Dean, I don't believe you any more or anything you're going to try to tell me. I came to
see you tonight because there's a paper I want you to sign for the family. Your father is no longer
mentioned among us and we want absolutely nothing to do with him, and, I'm sorry to say, with
you either, any more." I looked at Dean. His face dropped and darkened.
 "Yass, yass," he said. The cousin continued to drive us around and even bought us ice-cream pops.
Nevertheless Dean plied him with innumerable questions about the past and the cousin supplied the
answers and for a moment Dean almost began to sweat again with excitement. Oh, where was his
raggedy father that night? The cousin dropped us off at the sad lights of a carnival on Alameda
Boulevard at Federal. He made an appointment with Dean for the paper-signing next afternoon and
left. I told Dean I was sorry he had nobody in the world to believe in him.
"Remember that I believe in you. I'm infinitely sorry for the foolish grievance I held against you
yesterday afternoon."
"All right, man, it's agreed," said Dean. We dug the carnival together. There were merry-go-rounds,
Ferris wheels, popcorn, roulette wheels, sawdust, and hundreds of young Denver kids in jeans
wandering around. Dust rose to the stars together with every sad music on earth. Dean was wearing
washed-out tight levis and a T-shirt and looked suddenly like a real Denver character again. There 
were motorcycle kids with visors and mustaches and beaded jackets hanging around the shrouds in
back of the tents with pretty girls in levis and rose shirts. There were a lot of Mexican girls too, and
one amazing little girl about three feet high, a midget, with the most beautiful and tender face in the
world, who turned to her companion and said, "Man, let's call up Gomez and cut out." Dean
stopped dead in his tracks at the sight of her. A great knife stabbed him from the darkness of the
night. "Man, I love her, oh, love her . . ." We had to follow her around for a long time. She finally
went across the highway to make a phone call in a motel booth and Dean pretended to be looking
through the pages of the directory but was really all wound tight watching her. I tried to open up a
conversation with the lovey-doll's friends but they paid no attention to us. Gomez arrived in a rattly
truck and took the girls off. Dean stood in the road, clutching his breast. "Oh, man, I almost
died. . . ."
"Why the hell didn't you talk to her?"
 "I can't, I couldn't . . ." We decided to buy some beer and go up to Okie Frankie's and play records.
We hitched on the road with a bag of beer cans. Little Janet, Frankie's thirteen- year-old daughter,
was the prettiest girl in the world and was about to grow up into a gone woman. Best of all were he
long, tapering, sensitive fingers that she used to talk wit like a Cleopatra Nile dance. Dean sat in the
farthest corne of the room, watching her with slitted eyes and saying, "Ye yes, yes." Janet was
already aware of him; she turned to for protection. Previous months of that summer I had a lot of
time with her, talking about books and little thing she was interested in.
7
Nothing happened that night; we went to sleep. Everything happened the next day. In the afternoon
De and I went to downtown Denver for our various chores and see the travel bureau for a car to
New York. On the way home in the late afternoon we started out for Okie Frankie's up Broadway,
where Dean suddenly sauntered into a sports goods store, calmly picked up a softball on the counter,
came out, popping it up and down in his palm. Nobody (iced; nobody ever notices such things. It
was a drowsy, afternoon. We played catch as we went along. "We'll get a travel-bureau car for sure
tomorrow."
A woman friend had given me a big quart of Old Grandad bourbon. We started drinking it at
Frankie's hoi Across the cornfield in back lived a beautiful young chick| that Dean had been trying
to make ever since he arrived. Trouble was brewing. He threw too many pebbles in window and
frightened her. As we drank the bourbon the littered living room with all its dogs and scattered toys
and sad talk, Dean kept running out the back kitchen door and crossing the cornfield to throw
pebbles and whistle. Once in a while Janet went out to peek. Suddenly Dean came back pale.
"Trouble, m'boy. That gal's mother is after me with a shotgun and she got a gang of high-school
kids to beat me up from down the road." 
"What's this? Where are they?"
"Across the cornfield, m'boy." Dean was drunk and didn't care. We went out together and crossed
the cornfield in the moonlight. I saw groups of people on the dark dirt road.
"Here they come!" I heard.
"Wait a minute," I said. "What's the matter, please?"
The mother lurked in the background with a big shotgun across her arm. "That damn friend of
yours been annoying us long enough. I'm not the kind to call the law. If he comes back here once
more I'm gonna shoot and shoot to kill." The high-school boys were clustered with their fists
knotted. I was so drunk I didn't care either, but I soothed everybody some.
I said, "He won't do it again. I'll watch him; he's my brother and listens to me. Please put your gun
away and don't bother about anything."
"Just one more time!" she said firmly and grimly across the dark. "When my husband gets home
I'm sending him after you."
"You don't have to do that; he won't bother you any more, understand. Now be calm and it's okay."
Behind me Dean was cursing under his breath. The girl was peeking from her bedroom window. I
knew these people from before and they trusted me enough to quiet down a bit. I took Dean by the
arm and back we went over the moony cornrows.
"Woo-hee!" he yelled. "I'm gonna git drunk tonight." We went back to Frankie and the kids.
Suddenly Dean got mad at a record little Janet was playing and broke it over his knee: it was a
hillbilly record. There was an early Dizzy Gillespie there that he valued-"Congo Blues," with Max
West on drums. I'd given it to Janet before, and I told her as she wept to take it and break it over
Dean's head. She went over and did so. Dean gaped dumbly, sensing everything. We all laughed.
Everything was all right. Then Frankie-Maw wanted to go out and drink beer in the roadhouse
saloons. "Lessgo!" yelled Dean. "Now dammit, if you'd bought that car I showed you Tuesday we
wouldn't have to walk."
"I didn't like that damn car!" yelled Frankie. Yang, yang, the kids started to cry. Dense, mothlike
eternity brooded in the crazy brown parlor with the sad wallpaper, the pink lamp, the excited faces.
Little Jimmy was frightened; I put him to sleep on the couch and trussed the dog on him. Frankie
drunkenly called a cab and suddenly while we were waiting for it a phone call came for me from
my woman friend. She had a middle-aged cousin who hated my guts, and that earlier afternoon I
had written a letter to Old Bull Lee, who was now in Mexico City, relating the adventures of Dean
and myself and under what circumstances we were staying in Denver. I wrote: "I have a woman
friend who gives me whisky and money and big suppers."
I foolishly gave this letter to her middle-aged cousin to mail, right after a fried-chicken supper. He
opened it, read it, and took it at once to her to prove to her that I was a con-man. Now she was
calling me tearfully and saying she never wanted to see me again. Then the triumphant cousin got 
on the phone and began calling me a bastard. As the cab honked outside and the kids cried and the
dogs barked and Dean danced with Frankie I yelled every conceivable curse I could think over that
phone and added all kinds of new ones, and in my drunken frenzy I told everybody over the phone
to go to hell and slammed it down and went out to get drunk.
We stumbled over one another to get out of the cab at the roadhouse, a hillbilly roadhouse near the
hills, and went in and ordered beers. Everything was collapsing, and to make things inconceivably
more frantic there was an ecstatic spastic fellow in the bar who threw his arms around Dean and
moaned in his face, and Dean went mad again with sweats and insanity, and to add still more to the
unbearable confusion Dean rushed out the next moment and stole a car right from the driveway and
took a dash to downtown Denver and came back with a newer, better one. Suddenly in the bar I
looked up and saw cops and people were milling around the driveway in the headlights of cruisers,
talking about the stolen car. "Somebody's been stealing cars left and right here!" the cop was saying.
Dean stood right in back of him, listening and saying, "Ah yass, ah yass." The cops went off to
check. Dean came in the bar and rocked back and forth with the poor spastic kid who had just
gotten married that day and was having a tremendous drunk while his bride waited somewhere.
"Oh, man, this guy is the greatest in the world!" yelled Dean. "Sal, Frankie, I'm going out and get a
real good car this time and we'll all go and with Tony too" (the spastic saint) "and have a big drive
in the mountains." And he rushed out. Simultaneously a cop rushed in and said a car stolen from
downtown Denver was parked in the driveway. People discussed it in knots. From the window I
saw Dean jump into the nearest car and roar off, and not a soul noticed him. A few minutes later he
was back in an entirely different car, a brand-new convertible. "This one is a beaut!" he whispered
in my ear. "The other one coughed too much-I left it at the crossroads, saw that lovely parked in
front of a farmhouse. Took a spin in Denver. Come on, man, let's all go riding." All the bitterness
and madness of his entire Denver life was blasting out of his system like daggers. His face was red
and sweaty and mean. "No, I ain't gonna have nothing to do with stolen cars." "Aw, come on, man!
Tony'll come with me, won't you, amazing darling Tony?" And Tony-a thin, dark-haired, holy-eyed
moaning foaming lost soul-leaned on Dean and groaned and groaned, for he was sick suddenly and
then for some odd intuitive reason he became terrified of Dean and threw up his hands and drew
away with terror writhing in his face. Dean bowed his head and sweated. He ran out and drove
away. Frankie and I found a cab in the driveway and decided to go home. As the cabby drove us up
the infinitely dark Alameda Boulevard along which I had walked many and many a lost night the
previous months of the summer, singing and moaning and eating the stars and dropping the juices
of my heart drop by drop on the hot tar, Dean suddenly hove up behind us in the stolen convertible
and began tooting and tooting and crowding us over and screaming. The cabby's face grew white.
"Just a friend of mine," I said. Dean got disgusted with us and suddenly shot ahead at ninety miles
an hour, throwing spectral dust across the exhaust. Then he turned in at Frankie's road and pulled 
up in front of the house; just as suddenly he took off again, U-turned, and went back toward town
as we got out of the cab and paid the fare. A few moments later as we waited anxiously in the dark
yard, he returned with still another car, a battered coupe, stopped it in a cloud of dust in front of the
house, and just staggered out and went straight into the bedroom and flopped dead drunk on the bed.
And there we were with a stolen car right on our doorstep.
I had to wake him up; I couldn't get the car started to dump it somewhere far off. He stumbled out
of bed, wearing just his jockey shorts, and we got in the car together, while the kids giggled from
the windows, and went bouncing and flying straight over the hard alfalfa-rows at the end of the
road whomp-ti-whomp till finally the car couldn't take any more and stopped dead under an old
cottonwood near the old mill. "Can't go any farther," said Dean simply and got out and started
walking back over the cornfield, about half a mile, in his shorts in the moonlight. We got back to
the house and he went to sleep. Everything was in a horrible mess, all of Denver, my woman friend,
cars, children, poor Frankie, the living room splattered with beer and cans, and I tried to sleep. A
cricket kept me awake for some time. At night in this part of the West the stars, as I had seen them
in Wyoming, are big as roman candles and as lonely as the Prince of the Dharma who's lost his
ancestral grove and journeys across the spaces between points in the handle of the Big Dipper,
trying to find it again. So they slowly wheeled the night, and then long before actual sunrise the
great red light appeared far over the dun bleak land toward West Kansas and the birds took up their
trill above Denver.
8
Horrible nauseas possessed us in the morning. First thing Dean did was go out across the cornfield
to see if the car would carry us East. I told him no, but he went anyway. He came back pale. "Man,
that's a detective's car and every precinct in town knows my fingerprints from the year that I stole
five hundred cars. You see what I do with them, I just wanta ride, man! I gotta go! Listen, we're
going to wind up in jail if we don't get out of here this very instant."
"You're damned right," I said, and we began packing as fast as our hands could go. Dangling
neckties and shirttails, we said quick good-bys to our sweet little family and stumbled off toward
the protective road where nobody would know us. Little Janet was crying to see us, or me, or
whatever it was, go-and Frankie was courteous, and I kissed her and apologized.
"He sure is a crazy one," she said. "Sure reminds me of my husband that run away. Just exactly the
same guy. I sure hope my Mickey don't grow up that way, they all do now."
And I said good-by to little Lucy, who had her pet beetle in her hand, and little Jimmy was asleep.
All this in the space of seconds, in a lovely Sunday morning dawn, as we stumbled off with our
wretched baggage. We hurried. Every minute we expected a cruising car to appear from around a
country bend and come sloping for us. 
"If that woman with the shotgun ever finds out, we're cooked," said Dean. "We must get a cab.
Then we're safe." We were about to wake up a farm family to use their phone, but the dog drove us
away. Every minute things became more dangerous; the coupe would be found wrecked in the
cornfield by an early-rising country man. One lovely old lady let us use her phone finally, and we
called a downtown Denver cab, but he didn't come. We stumbled on down the road. Early-morning
traffic began, every car looking like a cruiser. Then we suddenly saw the cruiser coming and I knew
it was the end of my life as I had known it and that it was entering a new and horrible stage of jails
and iron sorrows. But the cruiser was our taxi, and from that moment on we flew east.
At the travel bureau there was a tremendous offer for someone to drive a '47 Cadillac limousine to
Chicago. The owner had been driving up from Mexico with his family and got tired and put them
all on a train. All he wanted was identification and for the car to get there. My papers assured him
everything would come off right. I told him not to worry. I told Dean, "And don't scrounge with this
car." Dean was jumping up and down with excitement to see it. We had to wait an hour. We lay on
the grass near the church where in 1947 I had passed some time with panhandling hobos after
seeing Rita Bettencourt home, and there I fell asleep from sheer horror exhaustion with my face to
the afternoon birds. In fact they were playing organ music somewhere. But Dean hustled around
town. He talked up an acquaintance with a waitress in a luncheonette, made a date to take her
driving in his Cadillac that afternoon, and came back to wake me with the news. Now I felt better. I
rose to the new complications.
When the Cadillac arrived, Dean instantly drove off with it "to get gas," and the travel-bureau man
looked at me and said, "When's he coming back? The passengers are all ready to go." He showed
me two Irish boys from an Eastern Jesuit school waiting with their suitcases on the benches.
"He just went for gas. He'll be right back." I cut down to the corner and watched Dean as he kept
the motor running for the waitress, who had been changing in her hotel room; in fact I could see her
from where I stood, in front of her mirror, primping and fixing her silk stockings, and I wished I
could go along with them. She came running out and jumped in the Cadillac. I wandered back to
reassure the travel-bureau boss and the passengers. From where I stood in the door I saw a faint
flash of the Cadillac crossing Cleveland Place with Dean, T-shirted and joyous, fluttering his hands
and talking to the girl and hunching over the wheel to go as she sat sadly and proudly beside him.
They went to a parking lot in broad daylight, parked near the brick wall at the back (a lot Dean had
worked in once), and there, he claims, he made it with her, in nothing flat; not only that but
persuaded her to follow us east as soon as she had her pay on Friday, come by bus, and meet us at
Ian MacArthur's pad on Lexington Avenue in New York. She agreed to come; her name was
Beverly. Thirty minutes and Dean roared back, deposited the girl at her hotel, with kisses, farewells,
promises, and zoomed right up to the travel bureau to pick up the crew.
"Well, it's about time!" said the Broadway Sam travel-bureau boss. "I thought you'd gone off with 
that Cadillac."
"It's my responsibility," I said, "don't worry"-and said that because Dean was in such obvious
frenzy everybody could guess his madness. Dean became businesslike and assisted the Jesuit boys
with their baggage. They were hardly seated, and I had hardly waved good-by to Denver, before he
was off, the big motor thrumming with immense birdlike power. Not two miles out of Denver the
speedometer broke because Dean was pushing well over no miles an hour.
"Well, no speedometer, I won't know how fast I'm going. I'll just ball that jack to Chicago and tell
by time." It didn't seem we were even going seventy but all the cars fell from us like dead flies on
the straightaway highway leading up to Greeley. "Reason why we're going northeast is because, Sal,
we must absolutely visit Ed Wall's ranch in Sterling, you've got to meet him and see his ranch and
this boat cuts so fast we can make it without any time trouble and get to Chicago long before that
man's train." Okay, I was for it. It began to rain but Dean never slackened. It was a beautiful big car,
the last of the old-style limousines, black, with a big elongated body and whitewall tires and
probably bulletproof windows. The Jesuit boys-St. Bonaventura-sat in the back, gleeful and glad to
be underway, and they had no idea how fast we were going. They tried to talk but Dean said
nothing and took off his T-shirt and drove barechested. "Oh, that Beverly is a sweet gone little
gal-she's going to join me in New York-we're going to get married as soon as I can get divorce
papers from Camille-everything's jumping, Sal, and we're off. Yes!" The faster we left Denver the
better I felt, and we were doing it fast. It grew dark when we turned off the highway at Junction and
hit a dirt road that took us across dismal East Colorado plains to Ed Wall's ranch in the middle of
Coyote Nowhere. But it was still raining and the mud was slippery and Dean slowed to seventy, but
I told him to slow even more or we'd slide, and he said, "Don't worry, man, you know me."
"Not this time," I said. "You're really going much too fast." And he was flying along there on that
slippery mud and just as I said that we hit a complete left turn in the highway and Dean socked the
wheel over to make it but the big car skidded in the grease and wobbled hugely.
"Look out!" yelled Dean, who didn't give a damn and wrestled with his Angel a moment, and we
ended up backass in the ditch with the front out on the road. A great stillness fell over everything.
We heard the whining wind. We were in the middle of the wild prairie. There was a farmhouse a
quarter-mile up the road. I couldn't stop swearing, I was so mad and disgusted with Dean. He said
nothing and went off to the farmhouse in the rain, with a coat, to look for help.
"Is he your brother?" the boys asked in the back seat. "He's a devil with a car, isn't he?-and
according to his story he must be with the women."
"He's mad," I said, "and yes, he's my brother." I saw Dean coming back with the farmer in his
tractor. They hooked chains on and the farmer hauled us out of the ditch. The car was muddy brown,
a whole fender was crushed. The farmer charged us five dollars. His daughters watched in the rain.
The prettiest, shyest one hid far back in the field to watch and she had good reason because she was 
absolutely and finally the most beautiful girl Dean and I ever saw in all our lives.
She was about sixteen, and had Plains complexion like wild roses, and the bluest eyes, the most
lovely hair, and the modesty and quickness of a wild antelope. At every look from us she flinched.
She stood there with the immense winds that blew clear down from Saskatchewan knocking her
hair about her lovely head like shrouds, living curls of them. She blushed and blushed.
We finished our business with the farmer, took one last look at the prairie angel, and drove off,
slower now, till dark came and Dean said Ed Wall's ranch was dead ahead. "Oh, a girl like that
scares me," I said. "I'd give up everything and throw myself on her mercy and if she didn't want me
I'd just as simply go and throw myself off the edge of the world." The Jesuit boys giggled. They
were full of corny quips and Eastern college talk and had nothing on their bird-beans except a lot of
ill-understood Aquinas for stuffing for their pepper. Dean and I paid absolutely no attention to them.
As we crossed the muddy plains he told stories about his cowboy days, he showed us the stretch of
road where he spent an entire morning riding; and where he'd done fence-mending as soon as we
hit Wall's property, which was immense; and where old Wall, Ed's father, used to come clattering on
the rangeland grass chasing a heifer and howling, "Git im, git im, goddammit!" "He had to have a
new car every six months," said Dean. "He just couldn't care. When a stray got away from us he'd
drive right after it as far as the nearest waterhole and then get out and run after it on foot. Counted
every cent he ever made and put it in a pot. A mad old rancher. I'll show you some of his old wrecks
near the bunkhouse. This is where I came on probation after my last hitch in a joint. This is where I
lived when I wrote those letters you saw to Chad King." We turned off the road and wound across a
path through the winter pasture. A mournful group of whitefaced cows suddenly milled across our
headlights. "There they are! Wall's cows! We'll never be able to get through them. We'll have to get
out and whoop em up! Hee-hee-hee!!" But we didn't have to do that and only inched along through
them, sometimes gently bumping as they milled and mooed like a sea around the car doors. Beyond
we saw the light of Ed Wall's ranch house. Around this lonely light stretched hundreds of miles of
plains.
The kind of utter darkness that falls on a prairie like that is Inconceivable to an Easterner. There
were no stars, no moon, no light whatever except the light of Mrs. Wall's kitchen. What lay beyond
the shadows of the yard was an endless view of the world that you wouldn't be able to see till dawn.
After knocking on the door and calling out in the dark for Ed Wall, who was milking cows in the
barn, I took a short careful walk into that darkness, about twenty feet and no more. I thought I heard
coyotes. Wall said it was probably one of his father's wild horses whinnying in the distance. Ed
Wall was about our age, tall, rangy, spike-toothed, laconic. He and Dean used to stand around on
Curtis Street corners and whistle at girls. Now he took us graciously into his gloomy, brown,
unused parlor and fished around till he found dull lamps and lit them and said to Dean, "What in
the hell happened to yore thumb?" 
"I socked Marylou and it got infected so much they had to amputate the end of it."
"What in the hell did you go and do that for?" I could see he used to be Dean's older brother. He
shook his head; the milk pail was still at his feet. "You always been a crackbrained sonofabitch
anyhow."
Meanwhile his young wife prepared a magnificent spread in the big ranch kitchen. She apologized
for the peach ice cream: "It ain't nothin but cream and peaches froze up together." Of course it was
the only real ice cream I ever had in my whole life. She started sparsely and ended up abundantly;
as we ate, new things appeared on the table. She was a well-built blonde but like all women who
live in the wide spaces she complained a little of the boredom. She enumerated the radio programs
she usually listened to at this time of night. Ed Wall sat just staring at his hands. Dean ate
voraciously. He wanted me to go along with him in the fiction that I owned the Cadillac, that I was
a very rich man and that he was my friend and chauffeur. It made no impression on Ed Wall.
Every time the stock made sounds in the barn he raised his head to listen.
"Well, I hope you boys make it to New York." Far from believing that tale about my owning the
Cadillac, he was convinced Dean had stolen it. We stayed at the ranch about an hour. Ed Wall had
lost faith in Dean just like Sam Brady-he looked at him warily when he looked. There were riotous
days in the past when they had stumbled around the streets of Laramie, Wyoming, arm-in-arm
when the haying was over, but all this was dead and gone.
Dean hopped in his chair convulsively. "Well yes, well yes, and now I think we'd better be cutting
along because we gotta be in Chicago by tomorrow night and we've already wasted several hours."
The college boys thanked Wall graciously and we were off again. I turned to watch the kitchen light
recede in the sea of night. Then I leaned ahead.
9
In no time at all we were back on the main highway and that night I saw the entire state of
Nebraska unroll before my eyes. A hundred and ten miles an hour straight through, an arrow road,
sleeping towns, no traffic, and the Union Pacific streamliner falling behind us in the moonlight. I
wasn't frightened at all that night; it was perfectly legitimate to go no and talk and have all the
Nebraska towns- Ogallala, Gothenburg, Kearney, Grand Island, Columbus- unreel with dreamlike
rapidity as we roared ahead and talked. It was a magnificent car; it could hold the road like a boat
holds on water. Gradual curves were its singing ease. "Ah, man, what a dreamboat," sighed Dean.
"Think if you and I had a car like this what we could do. Do you know there's a road that goes
down Mexico and all the way to Panama?-and maybe all the way to the bottom of South America
where the Indians are seven feet tall and eat cocaine on the mountainside? Yes! You and I, Sal, we'd
dig the whole world with a car like this because, man, the road must eventually lead to the whole
world. Ain't nowhere else it can go -right? Oh, and are we going to cut around old Chi with this 
thing! Think of it, Sal, I've never been to Chicago in all my life, never stopped."
"We'll come in there like gangsters in this Cadillac!"
"Yes! And girls! We can pick up girls, in fact, Sal, I've decided to make extra-special fast time so
we can have an entire evening to cut around in this thing. Now you just relax and I'll ball the jack
all the way." "Well, how fast are you going now?"
 "A steady one-ten I figure-you wouldn't notice it. We've still got all Iowa in the daytime and then
I'll make that old Illinois in nothing flat." The boys fell asleep and we talked and talked all night.
It was remarkable how Dean could go mad and then suddenly continue with his soul-which I think
is wrapped up in a fast car, a coast to reach, and a woman at the end of the road-calmly and sanely
as though nothing had happened. "I get like that every time in Denver now-I can't make that town
any more. Gookly, gooky, Dean's a spooky. Zoom!" I told him I had been over this Nebraska road
before in '47. He had too. "Sal, when I was working for the New Era Laundry in Los Angeles,
nineteen forty-four, falsifying my age, I made a trip to Indianapolis Speedway for the express
purpose of seeing the Memorial Day classic hitch, hiking by day and stealing cars by night to make
time. Also I had a twenty-dollar Buick back in LA, my first car, it couldn't pass the brake and light
inspection so I decided I needed an out-of-state license to operate the car without arrest so went
through here to get the license. As I was hitchhiking through one of these very towns, with the
plates concealed under my coat, a nosy sheriff who thought I was pretty young to be hitchhiking
accosted me on the main drag. He found the plates and threw me in the two-cell jail with a county
delinquent who should have been in the home for the old since he couldn't feed himself (the
sheriff's wife fed him) and sat through the day drooling and slobbering. After investigation, which
included corny things like a fatherly quiz, then an abrupt turnabout to frighten me with threats, a
comparison of my handwriting, et cetera, and after I made the most magnificent speech of my life
to get out of it, concluding with the confession that I was lying about my car-stealing past and was
only looking for my paw who was a farmhand hereabouts, he let me go. Of course I missed the
races. The following fall I did the same thing again to see the Notre Dame-California game in
South Bend, Indiana-trouble none this time and, Sal, I had just the money for the ticket and not an
extra cent and didn't eat anything all up and back except for what I could panhandle from all kinds
of crazy cats I met on the road and at the same time gun gals. Only guy in the United States of
America that ever went to so much trouble to see a ball-game."
I asked him the circumstances of his being in LA in 1944. "I was arrested in Arizona, the joint
absolutely the worst joint I've ever been in. I had to escape and pulled the greatest escape in my life,
speaking of escapes, you see, in a general way. In the woods, you know, and crawling, and swampsup around that mountain country. Rubber hoses and the works and accidental so-called death facing
me I had to cut out of those woods along the ridge so as to keep away from trails and paths and
roads. Had to get rid of my joint clothes and sneaked the neatest theft of a shirt and pants from a 
gas station outside Flagstaff, arriving LA two days later clad as gas attendant and walked to the first
station I saw and got hired and got myself a room and changed name (Lee Buliay) and spent an
exciting year in LA, including a whole gang of new friends and some really great girls, that season
ending when we were all driving on Hollywood Boulevard one night and I told my buddy to steer
the car while I kissed my girl- I was at the wheel, see-and he didn't hear me and we ran smack into
a post but only going twenty and I broke my nose. You've seen before my nose-the crooked Grecian
curve up here. After that I went to Denver and met Marylou in a soda fountain that spring. Oh, man,
she was only fifteen and wearing jeans and just waiting for someone to pick her up. Three days
three nights of talk in the Ace Hotel, third floor, southeast corner room, holy memento room and
sacred scene of my days-she was so sweet then, so young, hmm, ahh! But hey, look down there in
the night thar, hup, hup, a buncha old bums by a fire by the rail, damn me." He almost slowed down.
"You see, I never know whether my father's there or not." There were some figures by the tracks,
reeling^ in front of a woodfire. "I never know whether to ask. He might be anywhere." We drove on.
Somewhere behind us or in front of us in the huge night his father lay drunk under a bush, and no
doubt about it-spittle on his chin, water on his pants, molasses in his ears, scabs on his nose, maybe
blood in his hair and the moon shining down on him.
I took Dean's arm. "Ah, man, we're sure going home now." New York was going to be his
permanent home for the first time. He jiggled all over; he couldn't wait.
"And think, Sal, when we get to Pennsy we'll start hearing that gone Eastern bop on the disk
jockeys. Geeyah, roll, old boat, roll!" The magnificent car made the wind roar; it made the plains
unfold like a roll of paper; it cast hot tar from itself with deference-an imperial boat. I opened my
eyes to a fanning dawn; we were hurling up to it. Dean's rocky dogged face as ever bent over the
dashlight with a bony purpose of its own.
"What are you thinking, Pops?"
"Ah-ha, ah-ha, same old thing, y'know-gurls gurls gurls."
I went to sleep and woke up to the dry, hot atmosphere of July Sunday morning in Iowa, and still
Dean was driving and driving and had not slackened his speed; he took the curvy corndales of Iowa
at a minimum of eighty and the straightaway 110 as usual, unless both-ways traffic forced him to
fall in line at a crawling and miserable sixty. When there was a chance he shot ahead and passed
cars by the half-dozen and left them behind in a cloud of dust. A mad guy in a brand-new Buick
saw all this on the road and decided to race us. When Dean was just about to pass a passel the guy
shot by us without warning and howled and tooted his horn and flashed the tail lights for challenge.
We took off after him like a big bird. "Now wait," laughed Dean, "I'm going to tease that
sonofabitch for a dozen miles or so. Watch." He let the Buick go way ahead and then accelerated
and caught up with it most impolitely. Mad Buick went out of his mind; he gunned up to a hundred.
We had a chance to see who he was. He seemed to be some kind of Chicago hipster traveling with a 
woman old enough to be-and probably actually was-his mother. God knows if she was complaining,
but he raced. His hair was dark and wild, an Italian from old Chi; he wore a sports shirt. Maybe
there was an idea in his mind that we were a new gang from LA invading Chicago, maybe some of
Mickey Cohen's men, because the limousine looked every bit the part and the license plates were
California. Mainly it was just road kicks. He took terrible chances to stay ahead of us; he passed
cars on curves and barely got back in line as a truck wobbled into view and loomed up huge. Eighty
miles of Iowa we unreeled in this fashion, and the race was so interesting that I had no opportunity
to be frightened. Then the mad guy gave up, pulled up at a gas station, probably on orders from the
old lady, and as we roared by he waved gleefully. On we sped, Dean barechested, I with my feet on
the dashboard, and the college boys sleeping in the back. We stopped to eat breakfast at a diner run
by a white-haired lady who gave us extra-large portions of potatoes as church-bells rang in the
nearby town. Then off again.
"Dean, don't drive so fast in the daytime."
"Don't worry, man, I know what I'm doing." I began to flinch. Dean came up on lines of cars like
the Angel of Terror. He almost rammed them along as he looked for an opening. He teased their
bumpers, he eased and pushed and craned around to see the curve, then the huge car leaped to his
touch and passed, and always by a hair we made it back to our side as other lines filed by in the
opposite direction and I shuddered. I couldn't take it any more. It is only seldom that you find a
long Nebraskan straightaway in Iowa, and when we finally hit one Dean made his usual no and I
saw flashing by outside several scenes that I remembered from 1947-a long stretch where Eddie
and I had been stranded two hours. All that old road of the past unreeling dizzily as if the cup of life
had been overturned and everything gone mad. My eyes ached in nightmare day.
"Ah hell, Dean, I'm going in the back seat, I can't stand it any more, I can't look."
"Hee-hee-hee!" tittered Dean and he passed a car on a narrow bridge and swerved in dust and
roared on. I jumped in the back seat and curled up to sleep. One of the boys jumped in front for the
fun. Great horrors that we were going to crash this very morning took hold of me and I got down on
the floor and closed my eyes and tried to go to sleep. As a seaman I used to think of the waves
rushing beneath the shell of the ship and the bottomless deeps there under-now I could feel the road
some twenty inches beneath me, unfurling and flying and hissing at incredible speeds across the
groaning continent with that mad Ahab at the wheel. When I closed my eyes all I could see was the
road unwinding into me. When I opened them I saw flashing shadows of trees vibrating on the floor
of the car. There was no escaping it. I resigned myself to all. And still Dean drove, he had no
thought of sleeping till we got to Chicago. In the afternoon we crossed old Des Moines again. Here
of course we got snarled in traffic and had to go slow and I got back in the front seat. A strange
pathetic accident took place. A fat colored man was driving with his entire family in a sedan in
front of us; on the rear bumper hung one of those canvas desert waterbags they sell tourists in the 
desert. He pulled up sharp, Dean was talking to the boys in the back and didn't notice, and we
rammed him at five miles an hour smack on the waterbag, which burst like a boil and squirted
water in the air. No other damage except a bent bumper. Dean and I got out to talk to him. The
upshot of it was an exchange of addresses and some talk, and Dean not taking his eyes off the man's
wife whose beautiful brown breasts were barely concealed inside a floppy cotton blouse. "Yass,
yass." We gave him the address of our Chicago baron and went on.
The other side of Des Moines a cruising car came after us with the siren growling, with orders to
pull over. "Now what?"
The cop came out. "Were you in an accident coming in?" "Accident? We broke a guy's waterbag at
the junction." "He says he was hit and run by a bunch in a stolen car." This was one of the few
instances Dean and I knew of a Negro's acting like a suspicious old fool. It so surprised us we
laughed. We had to follow the patrolman to the station and there spent an hour waiting in the grass
while they telephoned Chicago to get the owner of the Cadillac and verify our position as hired
drivers. Mr. Baron said, according to the cop, "Yes, that is my car but I can't vouch for anything
else those boys might have done."
"They were in a minor accident here in Des Moines." "Yes, you've already told me that-what I
meant was, I can't vouch for anything they might have done in the past."
Everything was straightened out and we roared on. Newton, Iowa, it was, where I'd taken that dawn
walk in 1947. In the afternoon we crossed drowsy old Davenport again and the low-lying
Mississippi in her sawdust bed; then Rock Island, a few minutes of traffic, the sun reddening, and
sudden sights of lovely little tributary rivers flowing softly among the magic trees and greeneries of
mid-American Illinois. It was beginning to look like the soft sweet East again; the great dry West
was accomplished and done. The state of Illinois unfolded before my eyes in one vast movement
that lasted a matter of hours as Dean balled straight across at the same speed. In his tiredness he
was taking greater chances than ever. At a narrow bridge that crossed one of these lovely little
rivers he shot precipitately into an almost impossible situation. Two slow cars ahead of us were
bumping over the bridge; coming the other way was a huge truck-trailer with a driver who was
making a close estimate of how long it would take the slow cars to negotiate the bridge, and his
estimate was that by the time he got there they'd be over. There was absolutely no room on the
bridge for the truck and any cars going the other direction. Behind the truck cars pulled out and
peeked for a chance to get by it. In front of the slow cars other slow cars were pushing along. The
road was crowded and everyone exploding to pass. Dean came down on all this at no miles an hour
and never hesitated. He passed the slow cars, swerved, and almost hit the left rail of the bridge,
went head-on into the shadow of the unslowing truck, cut right sharply, just missed the truck's left
front wheel, almost hit the first slow car, pulled out to pass, and then had to cut back in line when
another car came out from behind the truck to look, all in a matter of two seconds, flashing by and 
leaving nothing more than a cloud of dust instead of a horrible five-way crash with cars lurching in
every direction and the great truck humping its back in the fatal red afternoon of Illinois with its
dreaming fields. I couldn't get it out of my mind, also, that a famous bop clarinetist had died in an
Illinois car-crash recently, probably on a day like this. I went to the back seat again.
The boys stayed in the back too now. Dean was bent on Chicago before nightfall. At a road-rail
junction we picked up two hobos who rounded up a half-buck between them for gas. A moment
before sitting around piles of railroad ties, polishing off the last of some wine, now they found
themselves in a muddy but unbowed and splendid Cadillac limousine headed for Chicago in
precipitous haste. In fact the old boy up front who sat next to Dean never took his eyes off the road
and prayed his poor bum prayers, I tell you. "Well," they said, "we never knew we'd get to Chicaga
sa fast." As we passed drowsy Illinois towns where the people are so conscious of Chicago gangs
that pass like this in limousines every day, we were a strange sight: all of us unshaven, the driver
barechested, two bums, myself in the back seat, holding on to a strap and my head leaned back on
the cushion looking at the countryside with an imperious eye-just like a new California gang come
to contest the spoils of Chicago, a band of desperados escaped from the prisons of the Utah moon.
When we stopped for Cokes and gas at a small-town station people came out to stare at us but they
never said a word and I think made mental notes of our descriptions and heights in case of future
need. To transact business with the girl who ran the gas-pump Dean merely threw on his T-shirt like
a scarf and was curt and abrupt as usual and got back in the car and off we roared again. Pretty soon
the redness turned purple, the last of the enchanted rivers flashed by, and we saw distant smokes of
Chicago beyond the drive. We had come from Denver to Chicago via Ed Wall's ranch, 1180 miles,
in exactly seventeen hours, not counting the two hours in the ditch and three at the ranch and two
with the police in Newton, Iowa, for a mean average of seventy miles per hour across the land, with
one driver. Which is a kind of crazy record.
10
Great Chicago glowed red before our eyes. We were suddenly on Madison Street among hordes of
hobos, some of them sprawled out on the street with their feet on the curb, hundreds of others
milling in the doorways of saloons and alleys. "Wup! wup! look sharp for old Dean Moriarty there,
he may be in Chicago by accident this year." We let out the hobos on this street and proceeded to
downtown Chicago. Screeching trolleys, newsboys, gals cutting by, the smell of fried food and beer
in the air, neons winking-"We're in the big town, Sal! Whooee!" First thing to do was park the
Cadillac in a good dark spot and wash up and dress for the night. Across the street from the YMCA
we found a redbrick alley between buildings, where we stashed the Cadillac with her snout pointed
to the street and ready to go, then followed the college boys up to the Y, where they got a room and
allowed us to use their facilities for an hour. Dean and I shaved and showered, I dropped my wallet 
in the hall, Dean found it and was about to sneak it in his shirt when he realized it was ours and was
right disappointed. Then we said good-by to those boys, who were glad they'd made it in one piece,
and took off to eat in a cafeteria. Old brown Chicago with the strange semi-Eastern, semi-Western
types going to work and spitting. Dean stood in the cafeteria rubbing his belly and taking it all in.
He wanted to talk to a strange middle-aged colored woman who had come into the cafeteria with a
story about how she had no money but she had buns with her and would they give her butter. She
came in napping her hips, was turned down, and went out flipping her butt. "Whoo!" said Dean.
"Let's follow her down the street, let's take her to the ole Cadillac in the alley. We'll have a ball."
But we forgot that and headed straight for North Clark Street, after a spin in the Loop, to see the
hootchy-kootchy joints and hear the bop. And what a night it was. "Oh, man," said Dean to me as
we stood in front of a bar, "dig the street of life, the Chinamen that cut by in Chicago. What a weird
town-wow, and that woman in that window up there, just looking down with her big breasts
hanging from her nightgown, big wide eyes. Whee. Sal, we gotta go and never stop going till we
get there."
"Where we going, man?"
"I don't know but we gotta go." Then here came a gang of young bop musicians carrying their
instruments out of cars. They piled right into a saloon and we followed them. They set themselves
up and started blowing. There we were! The leader was a slender, drooping, curly-haired,
pursy-mouthed tenorman, thin of shoulder, draped loose in a sports shirt, cool in the warm night,
self-indulgence written in his eyes, who picked up his horn and frowned in it and blew cool and
complex and was dainty stamping his foot to catch ideas, and ducked to miss others-and said,
"Blow," very quietly when the other boys took solos. Then there was Prez, a husky, handsome
blond like a freckled boxer, meticulously wrapped inside his sharkskin plaid suit with the long
drape and the collar falling back and the tie undone for exact sharpness and casualness, sweating
and hitching up his horn and writhing into it, and a tone just like Lester Young himself. "You see,
man, Prez has the technical anxieties of a money-making musician, he's the only one who's well
dressed, see him grow worried when he blows a clinker, but the leader, that cool cat, tells him not to
worry and just blow and blow-the mere sound and serious exuberance of the music is all he cares
about. He's an artist. He's teaching young Prez the boxer. Now the others dig!!" The third sax was
an alto, eighteen-year-old cool, contemplative young Charlie-Parker-type Negro from high school,
with a broadgash mouth, taller than the rest, grave. He raised his horn and blew into it quietly and
thoughtfully and elicited birdlike phrases and architectural Miles Davis logics. These were the
children of the great bop innovators.
Once there was Louis Armstrong blowing his beautiful top in the muds of New Orleans; before him
the mad musicians who had paraded on official days and broke up their Sousa marches into ragtime.
Then there was swing, and Roy Eldridge, vigorous and virile, blasting the horn for everything it 
had in waves of power and logic and subtlety-leaning to it with glittering eyes and a lovely smile
and sending it out broadcast to rock the jazz world. Then had come Charlie Parker, a kid in his
mother's woodshed in Kansas City, blowing his taped-up alto among the logs, practicing on rainy
days, coming out to watch the old swinging Basie and Benny Moten band that had Hot Lips Page
and the rest-Charlie Parker leaving home and coming to Harlem, and meeting mad Thelonius Monk
and madder Gillespie-Charlie Parker in his early days when he was nipped and walked around in a
circle while playing. Somewhat younger than Lester Young, also from KC, that gloomy, saintly
goof in whom the history of jazz was wrapped; for when he held his horn high and horizontal from
his mouth he blew the greatest; and as his hair grew longer and he got lazier and stretched-out, his
horn came down halfway; till it finally fell all the way and today as he wears his thick-soled shoes
so that he can't feel the sidewalks of life his horn is held weakly against his chest, and he blows
cool and easy getout phrases. Here were the children of the American bop night.
Stranger flowers yet-for as the Negro alto mused over everyone's head with dignity, the young, tall,
slender, blond kid from Curtis Street, Denver, jeans and studded belt, sucked on his mouthpiece
while waiting for the others to finish; and when they did he started, and you had to look around to
see where the solo was coming from, for it came from angelical smiling lips upon the mouthpiece
and it was a soft, sweet, fairy-tale solo on an alto. Lonely as America, a throatpierced sound in the
night.
What of the others and all the soundmaking? There was the bass-player, wiry redhead with wild
eyes, jabbing his hips at the fiddle with every driving slap, at hot moments his mouth hanging open
trancelike. "Man, there's a cat who can really bend his girl!" The sad drummer, like our white
hipster in Frisco Folsom Street, completely goofed, staring into space, chewing gum, wide-eyed,
rocking the neck with Reich kick and complacent ecstasy. The piano-a big husky Italian
truck-driving kid with meaty hands, a burly and thoughtful joy. They played an hour. Nobody was
listening. Old North Clark bums lolled at the bar, whores screeched in anger. Secret Chinamen went
by. Noises of hootchy-kootchy interfered. They went right on. Out on the sidewalk came an
apparition-a sixteen-year-old kid with a goatee and a trombone case. Thin as rickets, mad-faced, he
wanted to join this group and blow with them. They knew him and didn't want to bother with him.
He crept into the bar and surreptitiously undid his trombone and raised it to his lips. No opening.
Nobody looked at him. They finished, packed up, and left for another bar. He wanted to jump,
skinny Chicago kid. He slapped on his dark glasses, raised the trombone to his lips alone in the bar,
and went "Baugh!" Then he rushed out after them. They wouldn't let him play with them, just like
the sandlot football team in back of the gas tank. "All these guys live with their grandmothers just
like Tom Snark and our Carlo Marx alto," said Dean. We rushed after the whole gang. They went
into Anita O'Day's club and there unpacked and played till nine o'clock in the morning. Dean and I
were there with beers. 
At intermissions we rushed out in the Cadillac and tried to pick up girls all up and down Chicago.
They were frightened of our big, scarred, prophetic car. In his mad frenzy Dean backed up smack
on hydrants and tittered maniacally. By nine o'clock the car was an utter wreck; the brakes weren't
working any more; the fenders were stove in; the rods were rattling. Dean couldn't stop it at red
lights, it kept kicking convulsively over the roadway. It had paid the price of the night. It was a
muddy boot and no longer a shiny limousine. "Wheel" The boys were still blowing at Neets'.
Suddenly Dean stared into the darkness of a corner beyond the bandstand and said, "Sal, God has
arrived."
I looked. George Shearing. And as always he leaned his blind head on his pale hand, all ears opened
like the ears of an elephant, listening to the American sounds and mastering them for his own
English summer's-night use. Then they urged him to get up and play. He did. He played
innumerable choruses with amazing chords that mounted higher and higher till the sweat splashed
all over the piano and everybody listened in awe and fright. They led him off the stand after an hour.
He went back to his dark corner, old God Shearing, and the boys said, "There ain't nothin left after
that."
But the slender leader frowned. "Let's blow anyway."
Something would come of it yet. There's always more, a little further-it never ends. They sought to
find new phrases after Shearing's explorations; they tried hard. They writhed and twisted and blew.
Every now and then a clear harmonic cry gave new suggestions of a tune that would someday be
the only tune in the world and would raise men') souls to joy. They found it, they lost, they wrestled
for it, they found it again, they laughed, they moaned-and Dean sweated at the table and told them
to go, go, go. At nine o'clock in the morning everybody-musicians, girls in slacks, bartenders, and
the one little skinny, unhappy trombonist- staggered out of the club into the great roar of Chicago
day to sleep until the wild bop night again.
Dean and I shuddered in the raggedness. It was now time to return the Cadillac to the owner, who
lived out on Lake Shore Drive in a swank apartment with an enormous garage underneath managed
by oil-scarred Negroes. We drove out there and swung the muddy heap into its berth. The mechanic
did not recognize the Cadillac. We handed the papers over. He scratched his head at the sight of it.
We had to get out fast, We did. We took a bus back to downtown Chicago and that was that. And we
never heard a word from our Chicago baron about the condition of his car, in spite of the fact that
he had our addresses and could have complained.
11
It was time for us to move on. We took a bus to Detroit, Our money was now running quite low. We
lugged our wretched baggage through the station. By now Dean's thumb bandage was almost as
black as coal and all unrolled. We were both as miserable-looking as anybody could be after all the 
things we'd done. Exhausted, Dean fell asleep in the bus that roared across the state of Michigan. I
took up a conversation with a gorgeous country girl wearing a low-cut cotton blouse that displayed
the beautiful sun-tan on her breast tops. She was dull. She spoke of evenings in the country making
popcorn on the porch. Once this would have gladdened my heart but because her heart was not glad
when she said it I knew there was nothing in it but the idea of what one should do. "And what else
do you do for fun?" I tried to bring up boy friends and sex. Her great dark eyes surveyed me with
emptiness and a kind of chagrin that reached back generations and generations in her blood from
not having done what was crying to be done-whatever it was, and everybody knows what it was.
"What do you want out of life?" I wanted to take her and wring it out of her. She didn't have the
slightest idea what she wanted. She mumbled of jobs, movies, going to her grandmother's for the
summer, wishing she could go to New York and visit the Roxy, what kind of outfit she would
wear-something like the one she wore last Easter, white bonnet, roses, rose pumps, and lavender
gabardine coat. "What do you do on Sunday afternoons?" I asked. She sat on her porch. The boys
went by on bicycles and stopped to chat. She read the funny papers, she reclined on the hammock.
"What do you do on a warm summer's night?" She sat on the porch, she watched the cars in the
road. She and her mother made popcorn. "What does your father do on a summer's night?" He
works, he has an all-night shift at the boiler factory, he's spent his whole life supporting a woman
and her outpoppings and no credit or adoration. "What does your brother do on a summer's night?"
He rides around on his bicycle, he hangs out in front of the soda fountain. "What is he aching to
do? What are we all aching to do? What do we want?" She didn't know. She yawned. She was
sleepy. It was too much. Nobody could tell. Nobody would ever tell. It was all over. She was
eighteen and most lovely, and lost.
And Dean and I, ragged and dirty as if we had lived off locust, stumbled out of the bus in Detroit.
We decided to stay up in all-night movies on Skid Row. It was too cold for parks. Hassel had been
here on Detroit Skid Row, he had dug every shooting gallery and all-night movie and every
brawling bar with his dark eyes many a time. His ghost haunted us. We'd never find him on Times
Square again. We thought maybe by accident Old Dean Moriarty was here too-but he was not. For
thirty-five cents each we went into the beat-up old movie and sat down in the balcony till morning,
when we were shooed downstairs. The people who were in that all-night movie were the end. Beat
Negroes who'd come up from
Alabama to work in car factories on a rumor; old white bums; young longhaired hipsters who'd
reached the end of the road and were drinking wine; whores, ordinary couples, and housewives
with nothing to do, nowhere to go, nobody to believe in. If you sifted all Detroit in a wire basket
the beater solid core of dregs couldn't be better gathered. The picture was Singing Cowboy Eddie
Dean and his gallant white horse Bloop, that was number one; number two double-feature film was
George Raft, Sidney Greenstreet, and Peter Lorre in a picture about Istanbul. We saw both of these 
things six times each during the night. We saw them waking, we heard them sleeping, we sensed
them dreaming, we were permeated completely with the strange Gray Myth of the West and the
weird dark Myth of the East when morning came. All my actions since then have been dictated
automatically to my subconscious by this horrible osmotic experience. I heard big Greenstreet sneer
a hundred times; I heard Peter Lorre make his sinister come-on; I was with George Raft in his
paranoiac fears; I rode and sang with Eddie Dean and shot up the rustlers innumerable times.
People slugged out of bottles and turned around and looked everywhere in the dark theater for
something to do, somebody to talk to. In the head everybody was guiltily quiet, nobody talked. In
the gray dawn that puffed ghostlike about the windows of the theater and hugged its eaves I was
sleeping with my head on the wooden arm of a seat as six attendants of the theater converged with
their night's total of swept-up rubbish and created a huge dusty pile that reached to my nose as I
snored head down-till they almost swept me away too. This was reported to me by Dean, who was
watching from ten seats behind. All the cigarette butts, the bottles, the matchbooks, the come and
the gone were swept up in this pile. Had they taken me with it, Dean would never have seen me
again. He would have had to roam the entire United States and look in every garbage pail from
coast to coast before he found me embryonically convoluted among the rubbishes of my life, his
life, and the life of everybody concerned and not concerned. What would I have said to him from
my rubbish womb? "Don't bother me, man, I'm happy where I am. You lost me one night in Detroit
in August nineteen forty-nine. What right have you to come and disturb my reverie in this pukish
can?" In 1942 I was the star in one of the filthiest dramas of all time. I was a seaman, and went to
the Imperial Cafe on Scollay Square in Boston to drink; I drank sixty glasses of beer and retired to
the toilet, where I wrapped myself around the toilet bowl and went to sleep. During the night at
least a hundred seamen and assorted civilians came in and cast their sentient debouchments on me
till I was unrecognizably caked. What difference does it make after all?-anonymity in the world of
men is better than fame in heaven, for what's heaven? what's earth? All in the mind.
Gibberishly Dean and I stumbled out of this horror-hole at dawn and went to find our travel-bureau
car. After spending a good part of the morning in Negro bars and chasing gals and listening to jazz
records on jukeboxes, we struggled five miles in local buses with all our crazy gear and got to the
home of a man who was going to charge us four dollars apiece for the ride to New York. He was a
middle-aged blond fellow with glasses, with a wife and kid and a good home. We waited in the
yard while he got ready. His lovely wife in cotton kitchen dress offered us coffee but we were too
busy talking. By this time Dean was so exhausted and out of his mind that everything he saw
delighted him. He was reaching another pious frenzy. He sweated and sweated. The moment we
were in the new Chrysler and off to New York the poor man realized he had contracted a ride with
two maniacs, but he made the best of it and in fact got used to us just as we passed Briggs Stadium
and talked about next year's Detroit Tigers. 
In the misty night we crossed Toledo and went onward across old Ohio. I realized I was beginning
to cross and re-cross towns in America as though I were a traveling salesman -raggedy travelings,
bad stock, rotten beans in the bottom of my bag of tricks, nobody buying. The man got tired near
Pennsylvania and Dean took the wheel and drove clear the rest of the way to New York, and we
began to hear the Symphony Sid show on the radio with all the latest bop, and now we were
entering the great and final city of America. We got there in early morning. Times Square was being
torn up, for New York never rests. We looked for Hassel automatically as we passed.
In an hour Dean and I were out at my aunt's new flat in Long Island, and she herself was busily
engaged with painters who were friends of the family, and arguing with them about the price as we
stumbled up the stairs from San Francisco. "Sal," said my aunt, "Dean can stay here a few days and
after that he has to get out, do you understand me?" The trip was over. Dean and I took a walk that
night among the gas tanks and railroad bridges and fog lamps of Long Island. I remember him
standing under a streetlamp.
"Just as we passed that other lamp I was going to tell you a further thing, Sal, but now I am
parenthetically continuing with a new thought and by the time we reach the next I'll return to the
original subject, agreed?" I certainly agreed. We were so used to traveling we had to walk all over
Long Island, but there was no more land, just the Atlantic Ocean, and we could only go so far. We
clasped hands and agreed to be friends forever.
Not five nights later we went to a party in New York and I saw a girl called Inez and told her I had
a friend with me that she ought to meet sometime. I was drunk and told her he was a cowboy. "Oh,
I've always wanted to meet a cowboy."
"Dean?" I yelled across the party-which included Angel Luz Garcia, the poet; Walter Evans; Victor
Villanueva, the Venezuelan poet; Jinny Jones, a former love of mine; Carlo Marx; Gene Dexter; and
innumerable others-"Come over here, man." Dean came bashfully over. An hour later, in the
drunkenness and chichiness of the party ("It's in honor of the end of the summer, of course"), he
was kneeling on the floor with his chin on her belly and telling her and promising her everything
and sweating. She was a big, sexy brunette- as Garcia said, "Something straight out of Degas," and
generally like a beautiful Parisian coquette. In a matter of days they were dickering with Camille in
San Francisco by longdistance telephone for the necessary divorce papers so they could get married.
Not only that, but a few months later Camille gave birth to Dean's second baby, the result of a few
nights' rapport early in the year. And another matter of months and Inez had a baby. With one
illegitimate child in the West somewhere, Dean then had four little ones and not a cent, and was all
troubles and ecstasy and speed as ever. So we didn't go to Italy.
PART FOUR
1 
I came into some money from selling my book. I straightened out my aunt with rent for the rest of
the year. Whenever spring comes to New York I can't stand the suggestions of the land that come
blowing over the river from New Jersey and I've got to go. So I went. For the first time in our lives
I said good-by to Dean in New York and left him there. He worked in a parking lot on Madison and
40th,, As ever he rushed around in his ragged shoes and T-shirt and belly-hanging pants all by
himself, straightening out immense noontime rushes of cars.
When usually I came to visit him at dusk there was nothing to do. He stood in the shack, counting
tickets and rubbing his belly. The radio was always on. "Man, have you dug that mad Marty
Glickman announcing basketball games -up-to-midcourt-bounce-fake-set-shot, swish, two points.
Absolutely the greatest announcer I ever heard." He was reduced to simple pleasures like these. He
lived with Inez in a coldwater flat in the East Eighties. When he came home at night he took off all
his clothes and put on a hip-length Chinese silk jacket and sat in his easy chair to smoke a
waterpipe loaded with tea. These were his coming-home pleasures, together with a deck of dirty
cards. "Lately I've been concentrating on this deuce of diamonds. Have you noticed where her other
hand is? I'll bet you can't tell. Look long and try to see." He wanted to lend me the deuce of
diamonds, which depicted a tall, mournful fellow and a lascivious, sad whore on a bed trying a
position. "Go ahead, man, I've used it many times!" Inez cooked in the kitchen and looked in with a
wry smile. Everything was all right with her. "Dig her? Dig her, man? That's Inez. See, that's all she
does, she pokes her head in the door and smiles. Oh, I've talked with her and we've got everything
straightened out most beautifully. We're going to go and live on a farm in Pennsylvania this
summer-station wagon for me to cut back to New York for kicks, nice big house, and have a lot of
kids in the next few years. Ahem! Harrumph! Egad!" He leaped out of the chair and put on a Willie
Jackson record, "Gator Tail." He stood before it, socking his palms and rocking and pumping his
knees to the beat. "Whoo! That sonumbitch! First time I heard him I thought he'd die the next night,
but he's still alive."
This was exactly what he had been doing with Camille in Frisco on the other side of the continent.
The same battered trunk stuck out from under the bed, ready to fly. Inez called up Camille on the
phone repeatedly and had long talks with her; they even talked about his joint, or so Dean claimed.
They exchanged letters about Dean's eccentricities. Of course he had to send Camille part of his
pay every month for support or he'd wind up in the workhouse for six months. To make up lost
money he pulled tricks in the lot, a change artist of the first order. I saw him wish a well-to-do man
Merry Christmas so volubly a five-spot in change for twenty was never missed. We went out and
spent it in Birdland, the bop joint. Lester Young was on the stand, eternity on his huge eyelids.
One night we talked on the corner of 47th Street and Madison at three in the morning. "Well, Sal,
damn, I wish you weren't going, I really do, it'll be my first time in New York without my old 
buddy." And he said, "New York, I stop over in it, Frisco's my hometown. All the time I've been
here I haven't had any girl but Inez-this only happens to me in New York! Damn! But the mere
thought of crossing that awful continent again- Sal, we haven't talked straight in a long time." In
New York we were always jumping around frantically with crowds of friends at drunken parties. It
somehow didn't seem to fit Dean. He looked more like himself huddling in the cold, misty spray of
the rain on empty Madison Avenue at night. "Inez loves me; she's told me and promised me I can
do anything I want and there'll be a minimum of trouble. You see, man, you get older and troubles
pile up. Someday you and me'll be coming down an alley together at sundown and looking in the
cans to see."
"You mean we'll end up old bums?"
"Why not, man? Of course we will if we want to, and all that. There's no harm ending that way. You
spend a whole life of non-interference with the wishes of others, including politicians and the rich,
and nobody bothers you and you cut along and make it your own way." I agreed with him. He was
reaching his Tao decisions in the simplest direct way. "What's your road, man?-holyboy road,
madman road, rainbow road, guppy road, any road. It's an anywhere road for anybody anyhow.
Where body how?" We nodded in the rain. "Sheeit, and you've got to look out for your boy. He ain't
a man 'less he's a jumpin man-do what the doctor say. I'll tell you. Sal, straight, no matter where I
live, my trunk's always sticking out from under the bed, I'm ready to leave or get thrown out. I've
decided to leave everything out of my hands. You've seen me try and break my ass to make it and
you know that it doesn't matter and we know time-how to slow it up and walk and dig and just
old-fashioned spade kicks, what other kicks are there? We know." We sighed in the rain. It was
falling all up and down the Hudson Valley that night. The great world piers of the sea-wide river
were drenched in it, old steamboat landings at Poughkeepsie were drenched in it, old Split Rock
Pond of sources was drenched in it, Vanderwhacker Mount was drenched in it.
"So," said Dean, "I'm cutting along in my life as it leads me. You know I recently wrote my old
man in jail in Seattle- I got the first letter in years from him the other day."
"Did you?"
"Yass, yass. He said he wants to see the 'babby' spelt with two b's when he can get to Frisco. I
found a thirteen-a-month coldwater pad on East Fortieth; if I can send him the money he'll come
and live in New York-if he gets here. I never told you much about my sister but you know I have a
sweet little kid sister; I'd like to get her to come and live with me too."
"Where is she?"
"Well, that's just it, I don't know-he's going to try to find her, the old man, but you know what he'll
really do."
"So he went to Seattle?"
"And straight to messy jail." 
"Where was he?"
"Texas, Texas-so you see, man, my soul, the state of things, my position-you notice I get quieter."
"Yes, that's true." Dean had grown quiet in New York. He wanted to talk. We were freezing to death
in the cold rain. We made a date to meet at my aunt's house before I left.
He came the following Sunday afternoon. I had a television set. We played one ballgame on the TV,
another on the radio, and kept switching to a third and kept track of all that was happening every
moment. "Remember, Sal, Hodges is on second in Brooklyn so while the relief pitcher is coming in
for the Phillies we'll switch to Giants-Boston and at the same time notice there DiMaggio has three
balls count and the pitcher is fiddling with the resin bag, so we quickly find out what happened to
Bobby Thomson when we left him thirty seconds ago with a man on third. Yes!"
Later in the afternoon we went out and played baseball with the kids in the sooty field by the Long
Island railyard. We also played basketball so frantically the younger boys said, "Take it easy, you
don't have to kill yourself." They bounced smoothly all around us and beat us with ease. Dean and I
were sweating. At one point Dean fell flat on his face on the concrete court. We huffed and puffed
to get the ball away from the boys; they turned and flipped it away. Others darted in and smoothly
shot over our heads. We jumped at the basket like maniacs, and the younger boys just reached up
and grabbed the ball from our sweating hands and dribbled away. We were like hotrock blackbelly
tenorman Mad of American back-alley go-music trying to play basketball against Stan Getz and
Cool Charlie. They thought we were crazy. Dean and I went back home playing catch from each
sidewalk of the street. We tried extra-special catches, diving over bushes and barely missing posts.
When a car came by I ran alongside and flipped the ball to Dean just barely behind the vanishing
bumper. He darted and caught it and rolled in the grass, and flipped it back for me to catch on the
other side of a parked bread truck. I just made it with my meat hand and threw it back so Dean had
to whirl and back up and fall on his back across the hedges. Back in the house Dean took his wallet,
har-rumphed, and handed my aunt the fifteen dollars he owed her from the time we got a speeding
ticket in Washington. She was completely surprised and pleased. We had a big supper. "Well,
Dean," said my aunt, "I hope you'll be able to take care of your new baby that's coming and stay
married this time."
"Yes, yass, yes."
"You can't go all over the country having babies like that' Those poor little things'll grow up
helpless. You've got to offer them a chance to live." He looked at his feet and nodded. In the raw
red dusk we said good-by, on a bridge over a superhighway.
"I hope you'll be in New York when I get back," I told him.
"All I hope, Dean, is someday we'll be able to live on the same street with our families and get to be
a couple of oldtimers together."
"That's right, man-you know that I pray for it completely mindful of the troubles we both had and 
the troubles coming, as your aunt knows and reminds me. I didn't want the new baby, Inez insisted,
and we had a fight. Did you know Mary-lou got married to a used-car dealer in Frisco and she's
having a baby?"
"Yes. We're all getting in there now." Ripples in the upside-down lake of the void, is what I should
have said. The bottom of the world is gold and the world is upside down. He took out a snapshot of
Camille in Frisco with the new baby girl. The shadow of a man crossed the child on the sunny
pavement, two long trouser legs in the sadness. "Who's that?"
"That's only Ed Dunkel. He came back to Galatea, they're gone to Denver now. They spent a day
taking pictures."
Ed Dunkel, his compassion unnoticed like the compassion of saints. Dean took out other pictures. I
realized these were all the snapshots which our children would look at someday with wonder,
thinking their parents had lived smooth, well-ordered, stabilized-within-the-photo lives and got up
in the morning to walk proudly on the sidewalks of life, never dreaming the raggedy madness and
riot of our actual lives, our actual night, the hell of it, the senseless nightmare road. All of it inside
endless and beginningless emptiness. Pitiful forms of ignorance. "Good-by, good-by." Dean walked
off in the long red dusk. Locomotives smoked and reeled above him. His shadow followed him, it
aped his walk and thoughts and very being. He turned and waved coyly, bashfully. He gave me the
boomer's highball, he jumped up and down, he yelled something I didn't catch. He ran around in a
circle. All the time he came closer to the concrete corner of the railroad overpass. He made one last
signal. I waved back. Suddenly he bent to his life and walked quickly out of sight. I gaped into the
bleakness of my own days. I had an awful long way to go too.
2
The following midnight, singing this little song,
Home in Missoula,
Home in Truckee,
Home in Opelousas,
Ain't no home for me.
Home in old Medora,
Home in Wounded Knee,
Home in Ogallala,
Home I'll never be,
I took the Washington bus; wasted some time there wandering around; went out of my way to see
the Blue Ridge, heard the bird of Shenandoah and visited Stonewall Jackson's grave; at dusk stood
expectorating in the Kanawha River and walked the hillbilly night of Charleston, West Virginia; at 
midnight Ashland, Kentucky, and a lonely girl under the marquee of a 'closed-up show. The dark
and mysterious Ohio, and Cincinnati at dawn. Then Indiana fields again, and St. Louis as ever in its
great valley clouds of afternoon. The muddy cobbles and the Montana logs, the broken steamboats,
the ancient signs, the grass and the ropes by the river. The endless poem. By night Missouri, Kansas
fields, Kansas night-cows in the secret wides, crackerbox towns with a sea for the end of every
street; dawn in Abilene. East Kansas grasses become West Kansas rangelands that climb up to the
hill of the Western night.
Henry Glass was riding the bus with me. He had got on at Terre Haute, Indiana, and now he said to
me, "I've told you why I hate this suit I'm wearing, it's lousy-but ain't all." He showed me papers.
He had just been released from Terre Haute federal pen; the rap was for stealing and selling cars in
Cincinnati. A young, curly-haired kid of twenty. "Soon's I get to Denver I'm selling this suit in a
pawnshop and getting me jeans. Do you know what they did to me in that prison? Solitary
confinement with a Bible; I used it to sit on the stone floor; when they seed I was doing that they
took the Bible away and brought back a leetle pocket-size one so big. Couldn't sit on it so I read the
whole Bible and Testament. Hey-hey-" he poked me, munching his candy, he was always eating
candy because his stomach had been ruined in the pen and couldn't stand anything else-"you know
they's some real hot things in that Bible." He told me what it was to "signify." "Anybody that's
leaving jail soon and starts talking about his release date is 'signifying' to the other fellas that have
to stay. We take him by the neck and say, 'Don't signify with me!' Bad thing, to signify-y'hear me?"
"I won't signify, Henry."
"Anybody signify with me, my nose opens up, I get mad enough to kill. You know why I been in
jail all my life? Because I lost my temper when I was thirteen years old. I was in a movie with a
boy and he made a crack about my mother- you know that dirty word-and I took out my jackknife
and cut up his throat and woulda killed him if they hadn't drug me off. Judge said, 'Did you know
what you were doing when you attacked your friend?' 'Yessir, Your Honor, I did, I wanted to kill the
sonofabitch and still do.' So I didn't get no parole and went straight to reform school. I got piles too
from sitting in solitary. Don't ever go to a federal pen, they're worstest. Sheet, I could talk all night
it's ben so long since I talked to somebody. You don't know how good I feel coming out. You just
sitting in that bus when I got on-riding through Terre Haute-what was you thinking?" , "I was just
sitting there riding."
" "Me, I was singing. I sat down next to you 'cause I was afraid to set down next to any gals for fear
I go crazy and reach under their dress. I gotta wait awhile."
 "Another hitch in prison and you'll be put away for life. You better take it easy from now."
"That's what I intend to do, only trouble is m'nose opens up and I can't tell what I'm doing."
He was on his way to live with his brother and sister-in-law; they had a job for him in Colorado.
His ticket was bought by the feds, his destination the parole. Here was a young kid like Dean had 
been; his blood boiled too much for him to bear; his nose opened up; but no native strange
saintliness to save him from the iron fate.
"Be a buddy and watch m'nose don't open up in Denver, will you, Sal? Mebbe I can get to my
brother's safe."
When we arrived in Denver I took him by the arm to Larimer Street to pawn the penitentiary suit.
The old Jew immediately sensed what it was before it was half unwrapped. "I don't want that damn
thing here; I get them every day from the Canyon City boys."
All of Larimer Street was overrun with ex-cons trying to sell their prison-spun suits. Henry ended
up with the thing under his arm in a paper bag and walked around in brand-new jeans and sports
shirt. We went to Dean's old Glenarm bar- on the way Henry threw the suit in an ashcan-and called
up Tim Gray. It was evening now.
"You?" chuckled Tim Gray. "Be right over."
In ten minutes he came loping into the bar with Stan Shephard. They'd both had a trip to France and
were tremendously disappointed with their Denver lives. They loved Henry and bought him beers.
He began spending all his penitentiary money left and right. Again I was back in the soft, dark
Denver night with its holy alleys and crazy houses. We started hitting all the bars in town,
roadhouses out on West Colfax, Five Points Negro bars, the works.
Stan Shephard had been waiting to meet me for years and now for the first time we were suspended
together in front of a venture. "Sal, ever since I came back from France I ain't had any idea what to
do with myself. Is it true you're going to Mexico? Hot damn, I could go with you? I can get a
hundred bucks and once I get there sign up for GI Bill in Mexico City College."
Okay, it was agreed, Stan was coming with me. He was a rangy, bashful, shock-haired Denver boy
with a big con-man smile and slow, easy-going Gary Cooper movements. "Hot damn!" he said and
stuck his thumbs on his belt and ambled down the street, swaying from side to side but slowly. His
grandfather was having it out with him. He had been opposed to France and now he was opposed to
the idea of going to Mexico. Stan was wandering around Denver like a bum because of his fight
with his grandfather. That night after we'd done all our drinking and restrained Henry from getting
his nose opened up in the Hot Shoppe on Colfax, Stan scraggled off to sleep in Henry's hotel room
on Glenarm. "I can't even come home late-my grandfather starts fighting with me, then he turns on
my mother. I tell you, Sal, I got to get out of Denver quick or I'll go crazy."
Well, I stayed at Tim Gray's and then later Babe Rawlins fixed up a neat little basement room for
me and we all ended up there with parties every night for a week. Henry vanished off to his
brother's and we never saw him again and never will know if anybody's signified with him since
and if they've put him away in an iron hall or if he busts his gaskets in the night free.
Tim Gray, Stan, Babe, and I spent an entire week of afternoons in lovely Denver bars where the
waitresses wear slacks and cut around with bashful, loving eyes, not hardened waitresses but 
waitresses that fall in love with the clientele and have explosive affairs and huff and sweat and
suffer from one bar to another; and we spent the same week in nights at Five Points listening to jazz,
drinking booze in crazy Negro saloons and gabbing till five o'clock in the morn in my basement.
Noon usually found us reclined in Babe's back yard among the little Denver kids who played
cowboys and Indians and dropped on us from cherry trees in bloom. I was having a wonderful time
and the whole world opened up before me because I had no dreams. Stan and I plotted to make Tim
Gray come with us, but Tim was stuck to his Denver life.
I was getting ready to go to Mexico when suddenly Denver Doll called me one night and said,
"Well, Sal, guess who's coming to Denver?" I had no idea. "He's on his way already, I got this news
from my grapevine. Dean bought a car and is coming out to join you." Suddenly I had a vision of
Dean, a burning shuddering frightful Angel, palpitating toward me across the road, approaching
like a cloud, with enormous speed, pursuing me like the Shrouded Traveler on the plain, bearing
down on me. I saw his huge face over the plains with the mad, bony purpose and the gleaming
eyes; I saw his wings; I saw his old jalopy chariot with thousands of sparking flames shooting out
from it; I saw the path it burned over the road; it even made its own road and went over the corn,
through cities, destroying bridges, drying rivers. It came like wrath to the West. I knew Dean had
gone mad again. There was no chance to send money to either wife if he took all his savings out of
the bank and bought a car. Everything was up, the jig and all. Behind him charred ruins smoked. He
rushed westward over the groaning and awful continent again, and soon he would arrive. We made
hasty preparations for Dean. News was that he was going to drive me to Mexico.
"Do you think he'll let me come along?" asked Stan in awe.
"I'll talk to him," I said grimly. We didn't know what to expect. "Where will he sleep? What's he
going to eat? Are there any girls for him?" It was like the imminent arrival of Gargan-tua;
preparations had to be made to widen the gutters of Denver and foreshorten certain laws to fit his
suffering bulk and bursting ecstasies.
3
It was like an old-fashioned movie when Dean arrived. I was in Babe's house in a golden afternoon.
A wore about the house. Her mother was away in Europe. The chaperon aunt was called Charity;
she was seventy-five years old and spry as a chicken. In the Rawlins family, which stretched all
over the West, she was continually shuttling from one house to another and making herself
generally useful. At one time she'd had dozens of sons. They were all gone; they'd all abandoned
her. She was old but she was interested in everything we did and said. She shook her head sadly
when we took slugs of whisky in the living room. "Now you might go out in the yard for that,
young man." Upstairs-it was a kind of boarding house that summer-lived a guy called Tom who
was hopelessly in love with Babe. He came from Vermont, from a rich family, they said, and had a 
career waiting for him there and everything, but he preferred being where Babe was. In the
evenings he sat in the living room with his face burning behind a newspaper and every time one of
us said anything he heard but made no sign. He particularly burned when Babe said something.
When we forced him to put down the paper he looked at us with incalculable boredom and
suffering. "Eh? Oh yes, I suppose so." He usually said just that.
Charity sat in her corner, knitting, watching us all with her birdy eyes. It was her job to chaperon, it
was up to her to see nobody swore. Babe sat giggling on the couch. Tim Gray, Stan Shephard, and I
sprawled around in chairs. Poor Tom suffered the tortures. He got up, yawned, and said, "Well,
another day another dollar, good night," and disappeared upstairs. Babe had no use whatever for
him as a lover. She was in love with Tim Gray; he wriggled like an eel out of her grasp. We were
sitting around like this on a sunny afternoon toward suppertime when Dean pulled up in front in his
jalopy and jumped out in a tweed suit with vest and watch chain.
"Hup! hup!" I heard out on the street. He was with Roy Johnson, who'd just returned from Frisco
with his wife Dorothy and was living in Denver again. So were Dunkel and Galatea Dunkel, and
Tom Snark. Everybody was in Denver again. I went out on the porch. "Well, m'boy," said Dean,
sticking out his big hand, "I see everything is all right on this end of the stick. Hello hello hello," he
said to everybody. "Oh yes, Tim Gray, Stan Shephard, howd'y'do!" We introduced him to Charity.
"Oh yass, howd'y'do. This is m'friend Roy Johnson here, was so kind as to accompany me,
harrumph! egad! kaff! kaff! Major Hoople, sir," he said, sticking out his hand to Tom, who stared at
him. "Yass, yass. Well, Sal old man, what's the story, when do we take off for Mexico? Tomorrow
afternoon? Fine, fine. Ahem! And now, Sal, I have exactly sixteen minutes to make it to Ed
Dunkel's house, where I am about to recover my old railroad watch which I can pawn on Larimer
Street before closing time, meanwhile buzzing very quickly and as thoroughly as time allows to see
if my old man by chance may be in Jiggs' Buffet or some of the other bars and then I have an
appointment with the barber Doll always told me to patronize and I have not myself changed over
the years and continue with that policy-kaff! kaff! At six o'clock sharp.'-sharp, hear me?-I want you
to be right here where I'll come buzzing by to get you for one quick run to Roy Johnson's house,
play Gillespie and assorted bop records, an hour of relaxation prior to any kind of further evening
you and Tim and Stan and Babe may have planned for tonight irrespective of my arrival which
incidentally was exactly forty-five minutes ago in my old thirty-seven Ford which you see parked
out there, I made it together with a long pause in Kansas City seeing my cousin, not Sam Brady but
the younger one . . ." And saying all these things, he was busily changing from his suitcoat to
T-shirt in the living-room alcove just out of sight of everyone and transferring his watch to another
pair of pants that he got out of the same old battered trunk.
"And Inez?" I said. "What happened in New York?"
"Officially, Sal, this trip is to get a Mexican divorce, cheaper and quicker than any kind. I've 
Camille's agreement at last and everything is straight, everything is fine, everything is lovely and
we know that we are now not worried about a single thing, don't we, Sal?"
Well, okay, I'm always ready to follow Dean, so we all bustled to the new set of plans and arranged
a big night, and it was an unforgettable night. There was a party at Ed Dunkel's brother's house.
Two of his other brothers are bus-drivers. They sat there in awe of everything that went on. There
was a lovely spread on the table, cake and drinks. Ed Dunkel looked happy and prosperous. "Well,
are you all set with Galatea now?"
"Yessir," said Ed, "I sure am. I'm about to go to Denver U, you know, me and Roy."
"What are you going to take up?"
"Oh, sociology and all that field, you know. Say, Dean gets crazier every year, don't he?"
"He sure does."
Galatea Dunkel was there. She was trying to talk to somebody, but Dean held the whole floor. He
stood and performed before Shephard, Tim, Babe, and myself, who all sat side by side in kitchen
chairs along the wall. Ed Dunkel hovered nervously behind him. His poor brother was thrust into
the background. "Hup! hup!" Dean was saying, tugging at his shirt, rubbing his belly, jumping up
and down. "Yass, well-we're all together now and the years have rolled severally behind us and yet
you see none of us have really changed, that's what so amazing, the dura-the dura-bility-in fact to
prove that I have here a deck of cards with which I can tell very accurate fortunes of all sorts." It
was the dirty deck. Dorothy Johnson and Roy Johnson sat stiffly in a corner. It was a mournful
party. Then Dean suddenly grew quiet and sat in a kitchen chair between Stan and me and stared
straight ahead with rocky doglike wonder and paid no attention to anybody.
He simply disappeared for a moment to gather up more energy. If you touched him he would sway
like a boulder suspended on a pebble on the precipice of a cliff. He might come crashing down or
just sway rocklike. Then the boulder exploded into a flower and his face lit up with a lovely smile
and he looked around like a man waking up and said, "Ah, look at all the nice people that are sitting
here with me. Isn't it nice! Sal, why, like I was tellin Min just t'other day, why, urp, ah, yes!" He got
up and went across the room, hand outstretched to one of the bus-drivers in the party. "Howd'y'do.
My name is Dean Moriarty. Yes, I remember you well. Is everything all right? Well, well. Look at
the lovely cake. Oh, can I have some? Just me? Miserable me?" Ed's sister said yes. "Oh, how
wonderful. People are so nice. Cakes and pretty things set out on a table and all for the sake of
wonderful little joys and delights. Hmm, ah, yes, excellent, splendid, harrumph, egad!" And he
stood swaying in the middle of the room, eating his cake and looking at everyone with awe. He
turned and looked around behind him. Everything amazed him, everything he saw. People talked in
groups all around the room, and he said, "Yes! That's right!" A picture on the wall made him stiffen
to attention. He went up and looked closer, he backed up, he stooped, he jumped up, he wanted to
see from all possible levels and angles, he tore at his T-shirt in exclamation, "Damn!" He had no 
idea of the impression he was making and cared less. People were now beginning to look at Dean
with maternal and paternal affection glowing in their faces. He was finally an Angel, as I always
knew he would become; but like any Angel he still had rages and furies, and that night when we all
left the party and repaired to the Windsor bar in one vast brawling gang, Dean became frantically
and demoniacally and seraphically drunk.
Remember that the Windsor, once Denver's great Gold Rush' hotel and in many respects a point of
interest-in the big saloon downstairs bullet holes are still in the walls-had once been Dean's home.
He'd lived here with his father in one of the rooms upstairs. He was no tourist. He drank in this
saloon like the ghost of his father; he slopped down wine, beer, and whisky like water. His face got
red and sweaty and he bellowed and hollered at the bar and staggered across the dance-floor where
honkytonkers of the West danced with girls and tried to play the piano, and he threw his arms
around ex-cons and shouted with them in the uproar. Meanwhile everybody in our party sat around
two immense tables stuck together. There were Denver D. Doll, Dorothy and Roy Johnson, a girl
from Buffalo, Wyoming, who was Dorothy's friend, Stan, Tim Gray, Babe, me, Ed Dunkel, Tom
Snark, and several others, thirteen in all. Doll was having a great time: he took a peanut machine
and set it on the table before him and poured pennies in it and ate peanuts. He suggested we all
write something on a penny postcard and mail it to Carlo Marx in New York. We wrote crazy things.
The fiddle music whanged in the Larimer Street night. "Isn't it fun?" yelled Doll. In the men's room
Dean and I punched the door and tried to break it but it was an inch thick. I cracked a bone in my
middle finger and didn't even realize it till the next day. We were fumingly drunk. Fifty glasses of
beer sat on our tables at one time. All you had to do was rush around and sip from each one.
Canyon City ex-cons reeled and gabbled with us. In the foyer outside the saloon old former
prospectors sat dreaming over their canes under the tocking old clock. This fury had been known by
them in greater days. Everything swirled. There were scattered parties everywhere. There was even
a party in a castle to which we all drove-except Dean, who ran off elsewhere-and in this castle we
sat at a great table in the hall and shouted. There were a swimming pool and grottoes outside. I had
finally found the castle where the great snake of the world was about to rise up.
Then in the late night it was just Dean and I and Stan Shephard and Tim Gray and Ed Dunkel and
Tommy Snark in one car and everything ahead of us. We went to Mexican town, we went to Five
Points, we reeled around. Stan Shephard was out of his mind with joy. He kept yelling,
"Sonofabitch! Hot damn!" in a high squealing voice and slapping his knees. Dean was mad about
him. He repeated everything Stan said and phewed and wiped the sweat off his face. "Are we gonna
get our kicks, Sal, travelin down to Mexico with this cat Stan! Yes!" It was our last night in holy
Denver, we made it big and wild. It all ended up with wine in the basement by candlelight, and
Charity creeping around upstairs in her nightgown with a flashlight. We had a colored guy with us
now, called himself Gomez. He floated around Five Points and didn't give a damn. When we saw 
him, Tommy Snark called out, "Hey, is your name Johnny?"
Gomez just backed up and passed us once more and said, "Now will you repeat what you said?"
"I said are you the guy they call Johnny?"
Gomez floated back and tried again. "Does this look a little more like him? Because I'm tryin my
best to be Johnny but I just can't find the way."
"Well, man, come on with us!" cried Dean, and Gomez jumped in and we were off. We whispered
frantically in the basement so as not to create disturbance with the neighbors. At nine o'clock in the
morning everybody had left except Dean and Shephard, who were still yakking like maniacs.
People got up to make breakfast and heard strange subterranean voices saying, "Yes! Yes!" Babe
cooked a big breakfast. The time was coming to scat off to Mexico.
Dean took the car to the nearest station and had everything shipshape. It was a '37 Ford sedan with
the right-side door unhinged and tied on the frame. The right-side front seat was also broken, and
you sat there leaning back with your face to the tattered roof. "Just like Min 'n' Bill," said Dean.
"We'll go coughing and bouncing down to Mexico; it'll take us days and days." I looked over the
map: a total of over a thousand miles, mostly Texas, to the border at Laredo, and then another 767
miles through all Mexico to the great city near the cracked Isthmus and Oaxacan heights. I couldn't
imagine this trip. It was the most fabulous of all. It was no longer east-west, but magic south. We
saw a vision of the entire Western Hemisphere rockribbing clear down to Tierra del Fuego and us
flying down the curve of the world into other tropics and other worlds. "Man, this will finally take
us to IT!" said Dean with definite faith. He tapped my arm. "Just wait and see. Hoo! Wheel"
I went with Shephard to conclude the last of his Denver business, and met his poor grandfather,
who stood in the door of the house, saying, "Stan-Stan-Stan."
"What is it, Granpaw?"
"Don't go."
"Oh, it's settled, I have to go now; why do you have to do that?" The old man had gray hair and
large almond eyes and a tense, mad neck.
"Stan," he simply said, "don't go. Don't make your old grandfather cry. Don't leave me alone again."
It broke my heart to see all this.
"Dean," said the old man, addressing me, "don't take my Stan away from me. I used to take him to
the park when he was a little boy and explain the swans to him. Then his little sister drowned in the
same pond. I don't want you to take my boy away."
"No," said Stan, "we're leaving now. Good-by." He struggled with his grips.
His grandfather took him by the arm. "Stan, Stan, Stan, don't go, don't go, don't go."
We fled with our heads bowed, and the old man still stood in the doorway of his Denver side-street
cottage with the beads hanging in the doors and the overstaffed furniture in the parlor. He was as
white as a sheet. He was still calling Stan. There was something paralyzed about his movements, 
and he did nothing about leaving the doorway, but just stood in it, muttering, "Stan," and "Don't
go," and looking after us anxiously as we rounded the corner.
"God, Shep, I don't know what to say."
"Never mind!" Stan moaned. "He's always been like that."
We met Stan's mother at the bank, where she was drawing money for him. She was a lovely
white-haired woman, still very young in appearance. She and her son stood on the marble floor of
the bank, whispering. Stan was wearing a levi outfit, jacket and all, and looked like a man going to
Mexico sure enough. This was his tender existence in Denver, and he was going off with the
naming tyro Dean. Dean came popping around the corner and met us just on time. Mrs. Shephard
insisted on buying us all a cup of coffee.
"Take care of my Stan," she said. "No telling what things might happen in that country."
"We'll all watch over each other," I said. Stan and his mother strolled on ahead, and I walked in
back with crazy Dean; he was telling me about the inscriptions carved on toilet walls in the East
and in the West.
"They're entirely different; in the East they make cracks and corny jokes and obvious references,
scatological bits of data and drawings; in the West they just write their names, Red O'Hara,
Blufftown Montana, came by here, date, real solemn, like, say, Ed Dunkel, the reason being the
enormous loneliness that differs just a shade and cut hair as you move across the Mississippi." Well,
there was a lonely guy in front of us, for Shephard's mother was a lovely mother and she hated to
see her son go but knew he had to go. I saw he was fleeing his grandfather. Here were the three of
us-Dean looking for his father, mine dead, Stan fleeing his old one, and going off into the night
together. He kissed his mother in the rushing crowds of 17th and she got in a cab and waved at us.
Good-by, good-by.
We got in the car at Babe's and said good-by to her. Tim was riding with us to his house outside
town. Babe was beautiful that day; her hair was long and blond and Swedish, her freckles showed
in the sun. She looked exactly like the little girl she had been. There was a mist in her eyes. She
might join us later with Tim-but she didn't. Good-by, good-by.
We roared off. We left Tim in his yard on the Plains outside town and I looked back to watch Tim
Gray recede on the plain. That strange guy stood there for a full two minutes watching us go away
and thinking God knows what sorrowful thoughts. He grew smaller and smaller, and still he stood
motionless with one hand on a washline, like a captain, and I was twisted around to see more of
Tim Gray till there was nothing but a growing absence in space, and the space was the eastward
view toward Kansas that led all the way back to my home in Atlantis.
Now we pointed our rattly snout south and headed for Castle Rock, Colorado, as the sun turned red
and the rock of the mountains to the west looked like a Brooklyn brewery in November dusks. Far
up in the purple shades of the rock there was someone walking, walking, but we could not see; 
maybe that old man with the white hair I had sensed years ago up in the peaks. Zacatecan Jack. But
he was coming closer to me, if only ever just behind. And Denver receded back of us like the city
of salt, her smokes breaking up in the air and dissolving to our sight.
4
It was May. And how can homely afternoons in Colorado with its farms and irrigation ditches and
shady dells -the places where little boys go swimming-produce a bug like the bug that bit Stan
Shephard? He had his arm draped over the broken door and was riding along and talking happily
when suddenly a bug flew into his arm and embedded a long stinger in it that made him howl. It
had come out of an American afternoon. He yanked and slapped at his arm and dug out the stinger,
and in a few minutes his arm had begun to swell and hurt. Dean and I couldn't figure what it was.
The thing was to wait and see if the swelling went down. Here we were, heading for unknown
southern lands, and barely three miles out of hometown, poor old hometown of childhood, a strange
feverish exotic bug rose from secret corruptions and sent fear into our hearts. "What is it?"
"I've never known of a bug around here that can make a swelling like that."
"Damn!" It made the trip seem sinister and doomed. We drove on. Stan's arm got worse. We'd stop
at the first hospital and have him get a shot of penicillin. We passed Castle Rock, came to Colorado
Springs at dark. The great shadow of Pike's Peak loomed to our right. We bowled down the Pueblo
highway. "I've hitched thousands and thousands of times on this road," said Dean. "I hid behind that
exact wire fence there one night when I suddenly took fright for no reason whatever."
We all decided to tell our stories, but one by one, and Stan was first. "We've got a long way to go,"
preambled Dean, "and so you must take every indulgence and deal with every single detail you can
bring to mind-and still h won't all be told. Easy, easy," he cautioned Stan, who began telling his
story, "you've got to relax too." Stan swung into his life story as we shot across the dark. He started
with his experiences in France but to round out ever-growing difficulties he came back and started
at the beginning with his boyhood in Denver. He and Dean compared times they'd seen each other
zooming around on bicycles. "One time you've forgotten, I know-Arapahoe Garage? Recall? I
bounced a ball at you on the corner and you knocked it back to me with your fist and it went in the
sewer. Grammar days. Now recall?" Stan was nervous and feverish. He wanted to tell Dean
everything. Dean was now arbiter, old man, judge, listener, approver, nodder. "Yes, yes, go on
please." We passed Walsenburg; suddenly we passed Trinidad, where Chad King was somewhere
off the road in front of a campfire with perhaps a handful of anthropologists and as of yore he too
was telling his life story and never dreamed we were passing at that exact moment on the highway,
headed for Mexico, telling our own stories. O sad American night! Then we were in New Mexico
and passed the rounded rocks of Raton and stopped at a diner, ravingly hungry for hamburgers,
some of which we wrapped in a napkin to eat over the border below. "The whole vertical state of 
Texas lies before us, Sal," said Dean. "Before we made it horizontal.
Every bit as long. We'll be in Texas in a few minutes and won't be out till tomorrow this time and
won't stop driving. Think of it."
We drove on. Across the immense plain of night lay the first Texas town, Dalhart, which I'd crossed
in 1947. It lay glimmering on the dark floor of the earth, fifty miles away. The land by moonlight
was all mesquite and wastes. On the horizon was the moon. She fattened, she grew huge and rusty,
she mellowed and rolled, till the morning star contended and dews began to blow in our
windows-and still we rolled. After Dalhart-empty crackerbox town-we bowled for Amarillo, and
reached it in the morning among windy panhandle grasses that only a few years ago waved around
a collection of buffalo tents. Now there were gas stations and new 1950 jukeboxes with immense
ornate snouts and ten-cent slots and awful songs. All the way from Amarillo to Childress, Dean and
I pounded plot after plot of books we'd read into Stan, who asked for it because he wanted to know.
At Childress in the hot sun we turned directly south on a lesser road and highballed across abysmal
wastes to Paducah, Guthrie, and Abilene, Texas. Now Dean had to sleep, and Stan and I sat in the
front seat and drove. The old car burned and bopped and struggled on. Great clouds of gritty wind
blew at us from shimmering spaces. Stan rolled right along with stories about Monte Carlo and
Cagnes-sur-Mer and the blue places near Menton where dark-faced people wandered among white
walls.
Texas is undeniable: we burned slowly into Abilene and all woke up to look at it. "Imagine living in
this town a thousand miles from cities. Whoop, whoop, over there by the tracks, old town Abilene
where they shipped the cows and shot it up for gumshoes and drank red-eye. Look out there!"
yelled Dean out the window with his mouth contorted like W. C. Fields. He didn't care about Texas
or any place. Red-faced Texans paid him no mind and hurried along the burning sidewalks. We
stopped to eat on the highway south of town. Nightfall seemed like a million miles away as we
resumed for Coleman and Brady-the heart of Texas, only, wildernesses of brush with an occasional
house near a thirsty creek and a fifty-mile dirt road detour and endless heat. "Old dobe Mexico's a
long way away," said Dean sleepily from the back seat, "so keep her rolling, boys, and we'll be
kissing senoritas b'dawn 'cause this old Ford can roll if y'know how to talk to her and ease her
along-except the back end's about to fall but don't worry about it till we get there." And he went to
sleep.
I took the wheel and drove to Fredericksburg, and here again I was crisscrossing the old map again,
same place Mary-lou and I had held hands on a snowy morning in 1949, and where was Marylou
now? "Blow!" yelled Dean in a dream and I guess he was dreaming of Frisco jazz and maybe
Mexican mambo to come. Stan talked and talked; Dean had wound him up the night before and
now he was never going to stop. He was in England by now, relating adventures hitchhiking on the
English road, London to Liverpool, with his hair long and his pants ragged, and strange British 
truck-drivers giving him lifts in glooms of the Europe void. We were all red-eyed from the
continual mistral-winds of old Tex-ass. There was a rock in each of our bellies and we knew we
were getting there, if slowly. The car pushed forty with shuddering effort. From Fredericksburg we
descended the great western high plains. Moths began smashing our windshield. "Getting down
into the hot country now, boys, the desert rats and the tequila. And this is my first time this far
south in Texas," added Dean with wonder. "Gawd-damn! this is where my old man comes in the
wintertime, sly old bum."
Suddenly we were in absolutely tropical heat at the bottom of a five-mile-long hill, and up ahead
we saw the lights of old San Antonio. You had the feeling all this used to be Mexican territory
indeed. Houses by the side of the road were different, gas stations beater, fewer lamps. Dean
delightedly took the wheel to roll us into San Antonio. We entered town in a wilderness of Mexican
rickety southern shacks without cellars and with old rocking chairs on the porch. We stopped at a
mad gas station to get a grease job. Mexicans were standing around in the hot light of the overhead
bulbs that were blackened by valley summerbugs, reaching down into a soft-drink box and pulling
out beer bottles and throwing the money to the attendant. Whole families lingered around doing this.
All around there were shacks and drooping trees and a wild cinnamon smell in the air. Frantic
teenage Mexican girls came by with boys. "Hoo!" yelled Dean. "Si! Mariana!" Music was coming
from all sides, and all kinds of music. Stan and I drank several bottles of beer and got high. We
were already almost out of America and yet definitely in it and in the middle of where it's maddest.
Hotrods blew by. San Antonio, ah-haa!
"Now, men, listen to me-we might as well goof a coupla hours in San Antone and so we will go and
find a hospital clinic for Stan's arm and you and I, Sal, will cut around and get these streets
dug-look at those houses across the street, you can see right into the front room and all the purty
daughters layin around with True Love magazines, wheel Come, let's go!"
We drove around aimlessly awhile and asked people for the nearest hospital clinic. It was near
downtown, where things looked more sleek and American, several semi-skyscrapers and many
neons and chain drugstores, yet with cars crashing through from the dark around town as if there
were no traffic laws. We parked the car in the hospital driveway and I went with Stan to see an
intern while Dean stayed in the car and changed. The hall of the hospital was full of poor Mexican
women, some of them pregnant, some of them sick or bringing their little sick kiddies. It was sad. I
thought of poor Terry and wondered what she was doing now. Stan had to wait an /entire hour till
an intern came along and looked at his swollen arm. There was a name for the infection he had, but
none of us bothered to pronounce it. They gave him a shot of penicillin.
Meanwhile Dean and I went out to dig the streets of Mexican San Antonio. It was fragrant and
soft-the softest air I'd ever known-and dark, and mysterious, and buzzing. Sudden figures of girls in
white bandannas appeared in the humming dark. Dean crept along and said not a word. "Oh, this is 
too wonderful to do anything!" he whispered. "Let's just creep along and see everything. Look!
Look! A crazy San Antonio f pool shack." We went in. A dozen boys were shooting pool at three
tables, all Mexicans. Dean and I bought Cokes and shoved nickels in the jukebox and played
Wynonie Blues Harris and Lionel Hampton and Lucky Millinder and jumped. Meanwhile Dean
warned me to watch.
"Dig, now, out of the corner of your eye and as we listen to Wynonie blow about his baby's pudding
and as we also smell the soft air as you say-dig the kid, the crippled kid shooting pool at table one,
the butt of the joint's jokes, y'see, he's been the butt all his life. The other fellows are merciless but
they love him."
The crippled kid was some kind of malformed midget with a great big beautiful face, much too
large, in which enormous brown eyes moistly gleamed. "Don't you see, Sal, a San Antonio Mex
Tom Snark, the same story the world over. See, they hit him on the ass with a cue? Ha-ha-ha! hear
them laugh. You see, he wants to win the game, he's bet four bits. Watch! Watch!" We watched as
the angelic young midget aimed for a bank shot. He missed. The other fellows roared. "Ah, man,"
said Dean, "and now watch." They had the little boy by the scruff of the neck and were mauling
him around, playful. He squealed. He stalked out in the night but not without a backward bashful,
sweet glance. "Ah, man, I'd love to know that gone little cat and what he thinks and what kind of
girls he has -oh, man, I'm high on this air!" We wandered out and negotiated several dark,
mysterious blocks. Innumerable houses hid behind verdant, almost jungle-like yards; we saw
glimpses of girls in front rooms, girls on porches, girls in the bushes with boys. "I never knew this
mad San Antonio! Think what Mexico'll be like! Lessgo! Lessgo!" We rushed back to the hospital.
Stan was ready and said he felt much better. We put our arms around him and told him everything
we'd done.
And now we were ready for the last hundred and fifty miles to the magic border. We leaped into the
car and off. I was so exhausted by now I slept all the way through Dilley and Encinal to Laredo and
didn't wake up till they were parking the car in front of a lunchroom at two o'clock in the morning.
"Ah," sighed Dean, "the end of Texas, the end of America, we don't know no more." It was
tremendously hot: we were all sweating buckets. There was no night dew, not a breath of air,
nothing except billions of moths smashing at bulbs everywhere and the low, rank smell of a hot
river in the night nearby-the Rio Grande, that begins in cool Rocky Mountain dales and ends up
fashioning world-valleys to mingle its heats with the Mississippi muds in the great Gulf.
Laredo was a sinister town that morning. All kinds of cab-drivers and border rats wandered around,
looking for opportunities. There weren't many; it was too late. It was the bottom and dregs of
America where all the heavy villains sink, where disoriented people have to go to be near a specific
elsewhere they can slip into unnoticed. Contraband brooded in the heavy syrup air. Cops were
red-faced and sullen and sweaty, no swagger. Waitresses were dirty and disgusted. Just beyond, you 
could feel the enormous presence of whole great Mexico and almost smell the billion tortillas
frying and smoking in the night. We had no idea what Mexico would really be like. We were at sea
level again, and when we tried to eat a snack we could hardly swallow it. I wrapped it up in napkins
for the trip anyway. We felt awful and sad. But everything changed when we crossed the mysterious
bridge over the river and our wheels rolled on official Mexican soil, though it wasn't anything but
carway for border inspection. Just across the street Mexico began. We looked with wonder. To our
amazement, it looked exactly like Mexico. It was three in the morning, and fellows in straw hats
and white pants were lounging by the dozen against battered pocky storefronts.
"Look-at-those-cats!" whispered Dean, "Oo," he breathed softly, "wait, wait." The Mexican
officials came out, grinning, and asked please if we would take out our baggage. We did. We
couldn't take our eyes from across the street. We were longing to rush right up there and get lost in
those mysterious Spanish streets. It was only Nuevo Laredo but it looked like Holy Lhasa to us.
"Man, those guys are up all night," whispered Dean. We hurried to get our papers straightened. We
were warned not to drink tapwater now we were over the border. The Mexicans looked at our
baggage in a desultory way. They weren't like officials at all. They were lazy and tender. Dean
couldn't stop staring at them. He turned to me.
 "See how the cops are in this country. I can't believe it!" He rubbed his eyes. "I'm dreaming." Then
it was time to change our money. We saw great stacks of pesos on a table and learned that eight of
them made an American buck, or thereabouts. We changed most of our money and stuffed the big
rolls in our pockets with delight.
5
Then we turned our faces to Mexico with bashful-ness and wonder as those dozens of Mexican cats
watched us from under their secret hatbrims in the night. Beyond were music and all-night
restaurants with smoke pouring out of the door. "Whee," whispered Dean very softly.
"Thassall!" A Mexican official grinned. "You boys all set. Go ahead. Welcome Mehico. Have good
time. Watch you money. Watch you driving. I say this to you personal, I'm Red, everybody call me
Red. Ask for Red. Eat good. Don't worry. Everything fine. Is not hard enjoin yourself in Mehico."
"Yes!" shuddered Dean and off we went across the street into Mexico on soft feet. We left the car
parked, and all three of us abreast went down the Spanish street into the middle of the dull brown
lights. Old men sat on chairs in the night and looked like Oriental junkies and oracles. No one was
actually looking at us, yet everybody was aware of everything we did. We turned sharp left into the
smoky lunchroom and went in to music of campo guitars on an American 'thirties jukebox.
Shirt-sleeved Mexican cabdrivers and straw-hatted Mexican hipsters sat at stools, devouring
shapeless messes of tortillas, beans, tacos, whatnot. We bought three bottles of cold beer- cerveza
was the name of beer-for about thirty Mexican cents"; or ten American cents each. We bought 
packs of Mexican cig- , arettes for six cents each. We gazed and gazed at our wonder- >, ful
Mexican money that went so far, and played with it and looked around and smiled at everyone.
Behind us lay the whole of America and everything Dean and I had previously known: about life,
and life on the road. We had finally found the magic land at the end of the road and we never
dreamed the extent of the magic. "Think of these cats staying up all hours of the night," whispered
Dean. "And think of this big continent ahead of us with those enormous Sierra Madre mountains
we saw in the movies, and the jungles all the way down and a whole desert plateau as big as ours
and reaching clear down to Guatemala and God knows where, whoo! What'll we do? What'll we
do? Let's move!" We got out and went back to the car. One last glimpse of America across the hot
lights of the Rio Grande bridge, and we turned our back and fender to it| and roared off.
Instantly we were out in the desert and there wasn't light or a car for fifty miles across the flats. And
just the dawn was coming over the Gulf of Mexico and we began see the ghostly shapes of yucca
cactus and organpipe on all sides. "What a wild country!" I yelped. Dean and I were completely
awake. In Laredo we'd been half dead. Stan, who'd been to foreign countries before, just calmly
slept in back seat. Dean and I had the whole of Mexico before us.
"Now, Sal, we're leaving everything behind us and entering^ a new and unknown phase of things.
All the years and troubles! and kicks-and now this! so that we can safely think of nothing else and
just go on ahead with our faces stuck out like this you see, and understand the world as, really and
genuine!^ speaking, other Americans haven't done before us-they were here, weren't they? The
Mexican war. Cutting across here with cannon."
"This road," I told him, "is also the route of old American 1 outlaws who used to skip over the
border and go down to old Monterrey, so if you'll look out on that graying desert and picture the
ghost of an old Tombstone hellcat making lonely exile gallop into the unknown, you'll see
further . . ." "It's the world," said Dean. "My God!" he cried, slapping the wheel. "It's the world! We
can go right on to South America if the road goes. Think of it! Son-of-z-bitch! Gawd-damm!" We
rushed on. The dawn spread immediately and we began to see the white sand of the desert and
occasional huts in the distance off the road. Dean slowed down to peer at them. "Real beat huts,
man, the kind you only find in Death Valley and much worse. These people don't bother with
appearances." The first town ahead that had any consequence on the map was called Sabinas
Hidalgo. We looked forward to it -eagerly. "And the road don't look any different than the
American road," cried Dean, "except one mad thing and if vou'll notice, right here, the mileposts
are written in kilometers and they click off the distance to Mexico City. See, it's the only city in the
entire land, everything points to it." There were only 767 more miles to that metropolis; in
kilometers the figure was over a thousand. "Damn! I gotta go!" cried Dean. For a while I closed my
eyes in utter exhaustion and kept hearing Dean pound the wheel with his fists and say, "Damn," and
"What kicks!" and "Oh, what a land!" and "Yes!" We arrived at Sabinas Hidalgo, across the desert, 
at about seven o'clock in the morning. We slowed down completely to see this. We woke up Stan in
the back seat. We sat up straight to dig. The main street was muddy and full of holes. On each side
were dirty broken-down adobe fronts. Burros walked in the street with packs. Barefoot women
watched us from dark doorways. The street was completely crowded with people on foot beginning
a new day in the Mexican countryside. Old men with handlebar mustaches stared at us. The sight of
three bearded, bedraggled American youths instead of the usual well-dressed tourists was of
unusual interest to them. We bounced along over Main Street at ten miles an hour, taking
everything in. A group of girls walked directly in front of us. As we bounced by, one of them said,
"Where you going, man?"
I turned to Dean, amazed. "Did you hear what she said?" Dean was so astounded he kept on driving
slowly and saying, "Yes, I heard what she said, I certainly damn well did, oh me, oh my, I don't
know what to do I'm so excited and sweetened in this morning world. We've finally got to heaven.
It-couldn't be cooler, it couldn't be grander, it couldn't be any-thing."
"Well, let's go back and pick em up!" I said.
"Yes," said Dean and drove right on at five miles an hour. He was knocked out, he didn't have to do
the usual things he-would have done in America. "There's millions of them all along the road!" he
said. Nevertheless he U-turned and came by the girls again. They were headed for work in the
fields;, they smiled at us. Dean stared at them with rocky eyes. "Damn," he said under his breath.
"Oh! This is too great to be true. Gurls, gurls. And particularly right now in my stage and condition,
Sal, I am digging the interiors of these homes as we pass them-these gone doorways and you look
inside and see beds of straw and little brown kids sleeping and stirring to wake, their thoughts
congealing from the empty mind of sleep, their selves rising, and the mothers cooking up breakfast
in iron pots, and dig them shutters they have for windows and the old men, the old men are so cool
and grand and not bothered by anything. There's no suspicion here, nothing like that. Everybody's
cool, everybody looks at you with such straight brown eyes and they don't say anything, just look,
and in that look all of the human qualities are soft and subdued and still there. Dig all the foolish
stories you read about Mexico and the sleeping gringo and all that crap)-and crap about greasers
and so on-and all it is, people here are straight and kind and don't put down any bull. I'm so amazed
by this." Schooled in the raw road night, Dean was come into the world to see it. He bent over the
wheel and looked both ways and rolled along slowly. We stopped for gas the other side of Sabinas
Hidalgo. Here a congregation of local straw-hatted ranchers with handlebar mustaches growled and
joked in front of antique gas-pumps. Across the fields an old man plodded with a burro in front of
his switch stick. The sun rose pure on pure and ancient activities of human life. Now we resumed
the road to Monterrey. The great mountains rose snow-capped before us; we bowled right for them.
A gap widened and wound up a pass and we went with it. In a matter of minutes we were out of the
mesquite desert and climbing among cool airs in a road with a stone wall along the precipice side 
and great whitewashed names of presidents on the cliff sides-ALEMAN! We met nobody on this
high road. It wound among the clouds and took us to the great plateau on top. Across this plateau
the big manufacturing town of Monterrey sent smoke to the blue skies with their enormous Gulf
clouds written across the bowl of day like fleece. Entering Monterrey was like entering Detroit,
among great long walls of factories, except for the burros that sunned in the grass before them and
the sight of thick city adobe neighborhoods with thousands of shifty hipsters hanging around
doorways and whores looking out of windows and strange shops that might have sold anything and
narrow sidewalks crowded with Hongkong-like humanity. "Yow!" yelled Dean. "And all in that sun.
Have you dug this Mexican sun, Sal? It makes you high. Whoo! I want to get on and on-this road
drives me!!" We mentioned stopping in the excitements of Monterrey, but Dean wanted to make
extra-special time to get to Mexico City, and besides he knew the road would get more interesting,
especially ahead, always ahead. He drove like a fiend and never rested. Stan and I were completely
bushed and gave it up and had to sleep. I looked up outside Monterrey and saw enormous weird
twin peaks beyond Old Monterrey, beyond where the outlaws went.
Montemorelos was ahead, a descent again to hotter altitudes. It grew exceedingly hot and strange.
Dean absolutely had to wake me up to see this. "Look, Sal, you must not miss." I looked. We were
going through swamps and alongside the road at ragged intervals strange Mexicans in tattered rags
walked along with machetes hanging from their rope belts, and some of them cut at the bushes.
They all stopped to watch us without expression. Through the tangled bush we occasionally saw
thatched huts with African-like bamboo walls, just stick huts. Strange young girls, dark as the moon,
stared from mysterious verdant doorways. "Oh, man, I want to stop and twiddle thumbs with the
little darlings," cried Dean, "but notice the old lady or the old man is always somewhere around-in
the back usually, sometimes a hundred yards, gathering twigs and wood or tending animals. They're
never alone. Nobody's ever alone in this country. While you've been sleeping I've been digging this
road and this country, and if I could only tell you all the thoughts I've had, man!" He was sweating.
His eyes were red-streaked and mad and also subdued and tender-he had found people like himself.
We bowled right through the endless swamp country at a steady forty-five. "Sal, I think the country
won't change for a long time. If you'll drive, I'll sleep now."
I took the wheel and drove among reveries of my own, through Linares, through hot, flat swamp
country, across the steaming Rio Soto la Marina near Hidalgo, and on. A great verdant jungle valley
with long fields of green crops opened before me. Groups of men watched us pass from a narrow
old-fashioned bridge. The hot river flowed. Then we rose in altitude till a kind of desert country
began reappearing. The city of Gregoria was ahead. The boys were sleeping, and 1 was alone in my
eternity at the wheel, and the road ran straight as an arrow. Not like driving across Carolina, or
Texas, or Arizona, or Illinois; but like driving across the world and into the places where we would
finally learn ourselves among the Fellahin Indians of the world, the essential strain of the basic 
primitive, wailing humanity that stretches in a belt around the equatorial belly of the world from
Malaya (the long fingernail of China) to India the great subcontinent to Arabia to Morocco to the
selfsame deserts and jungles of Mexico and over the waves to Polynesia to mystic Siam of the
Yellow Robe and on around, on around, so that you hear the same mournful wail by the rotted walls
of Cadiz, Spain, that you hear 12,000 miles around in the depths of Benares the Capital of the
World. These people were unmistakably Indians and were not at all like the Pedros and Panchos of
silly civilized American lore-they had high cheekbones, and slanted f eyes, and soft ways; they
were not fools, they were not clowns; they were great, grave Indians and they were the source of
mankind and the fathers of it. The waves are Chinese, but the earth is an Indian thing. As essential
as rocks in the desert are they in the desert of "history." And they knew this when we passed,
ostensibly self-important moneybag Americans on a lark in their land; they knew who was the
father and who was the son of antique life on earth, and made no comment. For when destruction
comes to the world of "history" and the Apocalypse of the Fellahin returns once more as so many
times before, people will still stare with the same eyes from the caves of Mexico as well as from the
caves of Bali, where it all began and where Adam was suckled and taught to know. These were my
growing thoughts as I drove the car into the hot, sunbaked town of Gregoria.
Earlier, back at San Antonio, I had promised Dean, as a joke, that I would get him a girl. It was a
bet and a challenge. As I pulled up the car at the gas station near sunny Gregoria a kid came across
the road on tattered feet, carrying an enormous windshield-shade, and wanted to know if I'd buy.
"You like? Sixty peso. Habla Espanol? Sesenta peso. My name Victor."
"Nah," I said jokingly, "buy senorita."
"Sure, sure!" he cried excitedly. "I get you gurls, onny-time. Too hot now," he added with distaste.
"No good gurls when hot day. Wait tonight. You like shade?"
I didn't want the shade but I wanted the girls. I woke up Dean. "Hey, man, I told you in Texas I'd
get you a girl- all right, stretch your bones and wake up, boy; we've got girls waiting for us."
"What? what?" he cried, leaping up, haggard. "Where? where?"
"This boy Victor's going to show us where."
"Well, lessgo, lessgo!" Dean leaped out of the car and clasped Victor's hand. There was a group of
other boys hanging around the station and grinning, half of them barefoot, all wearing floppy straw
hats. "Man," said Dean to me, "ain't this a nice way to spend an afternoon. It's so much cooler than
Denver poolhalls. Victor, you got gurls? Where? A donde?" ne cried in Spanish. "Dig that, Sal, I'm
speaking Spanish."
"Ask him if we can get any tea. Hey kid, you got ma-ree-wa-na?"
The kid nodded gravely. "Sho, onnytime, mon. Come with me."
"Hee! Wheel Hoo!" yelled Dean. He was wide awake and jumping up and down in that drowsy
Mexican street. "Let's all go!" I was passing Lucky Strikes to the other boys. They were getting 
great pleasure out of us and especially Dean. They turned to one another with cupped hands and
rattled off comments about the mad American cat. "Dig them, Sal, talking about us and digging. Oh
my goodness, what a world!" Victor got in the car with us, and we lurched off. Stan Shephard had
been sleeping soundly and woke up to this madness.
We drove way out to the desert the other side of town and turned on a rutty dirt road that made the
car bounce as never before. Up ahead was Victor's house. It sat on the edge of cactus flats
overtopped by a few trees, just an adobe cracker-box, with a few men lounging around in the yard.
"Who that?" cried Dean, all excited.
"Those my brothers. My mother there too. My sistair too. That my family. I married, I live
downtown."
"What about your mother?" Dean flinched. "What she say about marijuana."
"Oh, she get it for me." And as we waited in the car Victor got out and loped over to the house and
said a few words to an old lady, who promptly turned and went to the garden in back and began
gathering dry fronds of marijuana that had been pulled off the plants and left to dry in the desert sun.
Meanwhile Victor's brothers grinned from under a tree. They were coming over to meet us but it
would take a while for them to get up and walk over. Victor came back, grinning sweetly.
"Man," said Dean, "that Victor is the sweetest, gonest, fran-ticest little bangtail cat I've ever in all
my life met. Just look at him, look at his cool slow walk. There's no need to hurry around here." A
steady, insistent desert breeze blew into the car. It was very hot.
"You see how hot?" said Victor, sitting down with Dean in the front seat and pointing up at the
burning roof of the Ford. "You have ma-ree-gwana and it no hot no more. You wait."
"Yes," said Dean, adjusting his dark glasses, "I wait. For sure, Victor m'boy."
Presently Victor's tall brother came ambling along with some weed piled on a page of newspaper.
He dumped it on Victor's lap and leaned casually on the door of the car to nod and smile at us and
say, "Hallo." Dean nodded and smiled pleasantly at him. Nobody talked; it was fine. Victor
proceeded to roll the biggest bomber anybody ever saw. He rolled (using brown bag paper) what
amounted to a tremendous Corona cigar of tea. It was huge. Dean stared at it, popeyed. Victor
casually lit it and passed it around. To drag on this thing was like leaning over a chimney and
inhaling. It blew into your throat in one great blast of heat. We held our breaths and all let out just
about simultaneously. Instantly we were all high. The sweat froze on our foreheads and it was
suddenly like the beach at Acapulco. I looked out the back window of the car, and another and the
strangest of Victor's brothers-a tall Peruvian of an Indian with a sash over his shoulder-leaned
grinning on a post, too bashful to come up and shake hands. It seemed the car was surrounded by
brothers, for another one appeared on Dean's side. Then the strangest thing happened. Everybody
became so high that usual formalities were dispensed with and the things of immediate interest
were concentrated on, and now it was the strangeness of Americans and Mexicans blasting together 
on the desert and, more than that, the strangeness of seeing in close proximity the faces and pores
of skins and calluses of fingers and general abashed cheekbones of another world. So the Indian
brothers began talking about us in low voices and commenting; you saw them look, and size, and
compare mutualities of impression, or correct and modify, "Yeh, yeh", while Dean and Stan and I
commented on them in English.
"Will you d-i-g that weird brother in the back that hasn't moved from that post and hasn't by one cut
hair diminished the intensity of the glad funny bashfulness of his smile? And the one to my left here,
older, more sure of himself but sad. like hung-up, like a bum even maybe, in town, while Victor is
respectably married-he's like a gawddam Egyptian king, that you see. These guys are real cats. Ain't
never seen anything like it. And they're talking and wondering about us, like see? Just like we are
but with a difference of their own, their interest probably resolving around how we're dressed- same
as ours, really-but the strangeness of the things we have in the car and the strange ways that we
laugh so different from them, and maybe even the way we smell compared to them. Nevertheless
I'd give my eye-teeth to know what they're saying about us." And Dean tried. "Hey Victor, man
-what you brother say just then?"
Victor turned mournful high brown eyes on Dean. "Yeah, yeah."
"No, you didn't understand my question. What you boys talking about?"
"Oh," said Victor with great perturbation, "you no like this mar-gwana?"
"Oh, yeah, yes fine! What you talk about?"
"Talk? Yes, we talk. How you like Mexico?" It was hard to come around without a common
language. And everybody grew quiet and cool and high again and just enjoyed the breeze from the
desert and mused separate national and racial and personal high-eternity thoughts.
It was time for the girls. The brothers eased back to their station under the tree, the mother watched
from her sunny doorway, and we slowly bounced back to town.
But now the bouncing was no longer unpleasant; it was the most pleasant and graceful billowy trip
in the world, as over a blue sea, and Dean's face was suffused with an unnatural glow that was like
gold as he told us to understand the springs of the car now for the first time and dig the ride. Up and
down we bounced, and even Victor understood and laughed. Then he pointed left to show which
way to go for the girls, and Dean, looking left with indescribable delight and leaning that way,
pulled the wheel around and rolled us smoothly and surely to the goal, meanwhile listening to
Victor's attempt to speak and saying grandly and magniloquently "Yes, of course!
There's not a doubt in my mind! Decidedly, man! Oh, indeed! Why, pish, posh, you say the dearest
things to me! Of course! Yes! Please go on!" To this Victor talked gravely and with magnificent
Spanish eloquence. For a mad moment I thought Dean was understanding everything he said by
sheer wild insight and sudden revelatory genius inconceivably inspired by his glowing happiness.
In that moment, too, he looked so exactly like Franklin Delano Roosevelt-some delusion in my 
flaming eyes and floating brain-that I drew up in my seat and gasped with amazement. In myriad
pricklings of heavenly radiation I had to struggle to see Dean's figure, and he looked like God. I
was so high I had to lean my head back on the seat; the bouncing of the car sent shivers of ecstasy
through me. The mere thought of looking out the window at Mexico-which was now something
else in my mind-was like recoiling from some gloriously riddled glittering treasure-box that you're
afraid to look at because of your eyes, they bend inward, the riches and the treasures are too much
to take all at once. I gulped. I saw streams of gold pouring through the sky and right across the
tattered roof of the poor old car, right across my eyeballs and indeed right inside them; it was
everywhere. I looked out the window at the hot, sunny streets and saw a woman in a doorway and I
thought she was listening to every word we said and nodding to herself-routine paranoiac visions
due to tea. But the stream of gold continued. For a long time I lost consciousness in my lower mind
of what we were doing and only came around sometime later when I looked up from fire and
silence like waking from sleep to the world, or waking from void to a dream, and they told me we
were parked outside Victor's house and he was already at the door of the car with his little baby son
in his arms, showing him to us.
"You see my baby? Hees name Perez, he six month age." "Why," said Dean, his face still
transfigured into a shower of supreme pleasure and even bliss, "he is the prettiest child I have ever
seen. Look at those eyes. Now, Sal and Stan," he said, turning to us with a serious and tender air, "I
want you par-ti-cu-lar-ly to see the eyes of this little Mexican boy who is the son of our wonderful
friend Victor, and notice how he will come to manhood with his own particular soul bespeaking
itself through the windows which are his eyes, and such lovely eyes surely do prophesy and
indicate the loveliest of souls." It was a beautiful speech. And it was a beautiful baby. Victor
mournfully looked down at his angel. We all wished we had a little son like that. So great was our
intensity over the child's soul that he sensed something and began a grimace which led to bitter
tears and some unknown sorrow that we had no means to soothe because it reached too far back
into innumerable mysteries and time. We tried everything; Victor smothered him in his neck and
rocked, Dean cooed, I reached over and stroked the baby's little arms. His bawls grew louder. "Ah,"
said Dean, "I'm awfully sorry, Victor, that we've made him sad."
"He is not sad, baby cry." In the doorway in back of Victor, too bashful to come out, was his little
barefoot wife, with anxious tenderness waiting for the babe to be put back in her arms so brown
and soft. Victor, having shown us his child, climbed back into the car and proudly pointed to the
right.
"Yes," said Dean, and swung the car over and directed it through narrow Algerian streets with faces
on all sides watching us with gentle wonder. We came to the whorehouse. It was a magnificent
establishment of stucco in the golden sun. In the street, and leaning on the windowsills that opened
into the whorehouse, were two cops, saggy-trousered, drowsy, bored, who gave us brief interested 
looks as we walked in, and stayed there the entire three hours that we cavorted under their noses,
until we came out at dusk and at Victor's bidding gave them the equivalent of twenty-four cents
each, just for the sake of form.
And in there we found the girls. Some of them were reclining on couches across the dance floor,
some of them were boozing at the long bar to the right. In the center an arch led into small cubicle
shacks that looked like the places where you put on your bathing suit at public municipal beaches.
These shacks were in the sun of the court. Behind the bar was the proprietor, a young fellow who
instantly ran out when we told him we wanted to hear mambo music and came back with a stack of
records, mostly by Perez Prado, and put them on over the loudspeaker. In an instant all the city of
Gregoria could hear the good times going on at the Sala de Baile. In the hall itself the din of the
music-for this is the real way to play a jukebox and what it was originally for-was so tremendous
that it shattered Dean and Stan and me for a moment in the realization that we had never dared to
play music as loud as we wanted, and this was how loud we wanted. It blew and shuddered directly
at us. In a few minutes half that portion of town was at the windows, watching the Ameri-canos
dance with the gals. They all stood, side by side with the cops, on the dirt sidewalk, leaning in with
indifference and casualness. "More Mambo Jambo," "Chattanooga de Mambo,"
"Mambo Numero Ocho"-all these tremendous numbers resounded and flared in the golden,
mysterious afternoon like the sounds you expect to hear on the last day of the world and the Second
Coming. The trumpets seemed so loud I thought they could hear them clear out in the desert, where
the trumpets had originated anyway. The drums were mad. The mambo beat is the conga beat from
Congo, the river of Africa and the world; it's really the world beat. Oom-ta, ta-poo-poom-oom- ta,
ta-poo-poom. The piano montunos showered down on us from the speaker. The cries of the leader
were like great gasps in the air. The final trumpet choruses that came with drum climaxes on conga
and bongo drums, on the great mad Chattanooga record, froze Dean in his tracks for a moment till
he shuddered and sweated; then when the trumpets bit the drowsy air with their quivering echoes,
like a cavern's or a cave's, his eyes grew large and round as though seeing the devil, and he closed
them tight. I myself was shaken like a puppet by it; I heard the trumpets flail the light I had seen
and trembled in my boots.
On the fast "Mambo Jambo" we danced frantically with the girls. Through our deliriums we began
to discern their varying personalities. They were great girls. Strangely the wildest one was half
Indian, half white, and came from Venezuela, and only eighteen. She looked as if she came from a
good family. What she was doing whoring in Mexico at that age and with that tender cheek and fair
aspect, God knows. Some awful grief had driven her to it. She drank beyond all bounds. She threw
down drinks when it seemed she was about to chuck up the last. She overturned glasses continually,
the idea also being to make us spend' as much money as possible. Wearing her flimsy housecoat in
broad afternoon, she frantically danced with Dean and clung about his neck and begged and begged 
for everything. Dean was so stoned he didn't know what to start with, girls or mambo. They ran off
to the lockers. I was set upon by a fat and uninteresting girl with a puppy dog, who got sore at me
when I took a dislike to the dog because it kept trying to bite me. She compromised by putting it
away in the back, but by the time she returned I had been hooked by another girl, better looking but
not the best, who clung to my neck like a leech. I was trying to break loose to get at a
sixteen-year-old colored girl who sat gloomily inspecting her navel through an opening in her short
shirty dress across the hall. I couldn't do it. Stan had a fifteen-year-old girl with an almond-colored
skin and a dress that was buttoned halfway down and halfway up. It was mad. A good twenty men
leaned in that window, watching.
At one point the mother of the little colored girl-not colored, but dark-came in to hold a brief and
mournful convocation with her daughter. When I saw that, I was too ashamed to try for the one I
really wanted. I let the leech take me off to the back, where, as in a dream, to the din and roar of
more loudspeakers inside, we made the bed bounce a half-hour. It was just a square room with
wooden slats and no ceiling, ikon in a corner, a washbasin in another. All up and down the dark hall
the girls were calling, "Agua, agua caliente!" which means "hot water." Stan and Dean were also
out of sight. My girl charged thirty pesos, or about three dollars and a half, and begged for an extra
ten pesos and gave a long story about something. I didn't know the value of Mexican money; for all
I knew I had a million pesos. I threw money at her. We rushed back to dance. A greater crowd was
gathered in the Street. The cops looked as bored as usual. Dean's pretty Venezuelan dragged me
through a door and into another strange bar that apparently belonged to the whorehouse. Here a
young bartender was talking and wiping glasses and an old man with handlebar mustache sat
discussing something earnestly. And here too the mambo roared over another loud* speaker. It
seemed the whole world was turned on. Venezuela clung about my neck and begged for drinks. The
bartender wouldn't give her one. She begged and begged, and when he gave it to her she spilled it
and this time not on purpose, for I saw the chagrin in her poor sunken lost eyes. "Take it easy,
baby," I told her. I had to support her on the stool; she kept slipping off. I've never seen a drunker
woman, and only eighteen. I bought her another drink; she was tugging at my pants for mercy. She
gulped it up. I didn't have the heart to try her. My own girl was about thirty and took care of herself
better. With Venezuela writhing and suffering in my arms, I had a longing to take her in the back
and undress her and only talk to her-this I told myself. I was delirious with want of her and the
other little dark girl.
Poor Victor, all this time he stood on the brass rail of the bar with his back to the counter and
jumped up and down gladly to see his three American friends cavort. We bought him drinks. His
eyes gleamed for a woman but he wouldn't accept any, being faithful to his wife. Dean thrust
money at him. In this welter of madness I had an opportunity to see what Dean was up to. He was
so out of his mind he didn't know who I was when I peered at his face. "Yeah, yeah!" is all he said. 
It seemed it would never end. It was like a long, spectral Arabian dream in the afternoon in another
life-Ali Baba and the alleys and the courtesans. Again I rushed off with my girl to her room; Dean
and Stan switched the girls they'd had before; and we were out of sight a moment, and the
spectators had to wait for the show to go on. The afternoon grew long and cool.
Soon it would be mysterious night in old gone Gregoria. The mambo never let up for a moment, it
frenzied on like an endless journey in the jungle. I couldn't take my eyes off the little dark girl and
the way, like a queen, she walked around and was even reduced by the sullen bartender to menial
tasks such as bringing us drinks and sweeping the back. Of all the girls in there she needed the
money most; maybe her mother had come to get money from her for her little infant/ sisters and
brothers. Mexicans are poor. It never, never occurred to me just to approach her and give her some
money. I have a feeling she would have taken it with a degree of scorn, and scorn from the likes of
her made me flinch. In my madness I was actually in love with her for the few hours it all lasted; it
was the same unmistakable ache and stab across the mind, the same sighs, the same pain, and above
all the same reluctance and fear to approach. Strange that Dean and Stan also failed to approach
her; her unimpeachable dignity was the thing that made her poor in a wild old whorehouse, and
think of that. At one point I saw Dean leaning like a statue toward her, ready to fly, and
befuddlement cross his face as she glanced coolly and imperiously his way and he stopped rubbing
his belly and gaped and finally bowed his head. For she was the queen.
Now Victor suddenly clutched at our arms in the furor and made frantic signs.
"What's the matter?" He tried everything to make us understand. Then he ran to the bar and grabbed
the check from the bartender, who scowled at him, and took it to us to see. The bill was over three
hundred pesos, or thirty-six American dollars, which is a lot of money in any whorehouse. Still we
couldn't sober up and didn't want to leave, and though we were all run out we still wanted to hang
around with our lovely girls in this strange Arabian paradise we had finally found at the end of the
hard, hard road. But night was coming and we had to get on to the end; and Dean saw that, and
began frowning and thinking and trying to straighten himself out, and finally I broached the idea of
leaving once and for all. "So much ahead of us, man, it won't make any difference."
"That's right!" cried Dean, glassy-eyed, and turned to his Venezuelan. She had finally passed out
and lay on a wooden bench with her white legs protruding from the silk. The gallery in the window
took advantage of the show; behind them red shadows were beginning to creep, and somewhere I
heard a baby wail in a sudden lull, remembering I was in Mexico after all and not in a pornographic
hasheesh daydream in heaven.
We staggered out; we had forgotten Stan; we ran back in to get him and found him charmingly
bowing to the new evening whores, who had just come in for night shift. He wanted to start all over
again. When he is drunk he lumbers like a man ten feet tall and when he is drunk he can't be
dragged away from women. Moreover women cling to him like ivy. He insisted on staying and 
trying some of the newer, stranger, more proficient senoritas. Dean and I pounded him on the back
and dragged him out. He waved profuse good-bys to everybody-the girls, the cops, the crowds, the
children in the street outside; he blew kisses in all directions to ovations of Gregoria and staggered
proudly among the gangs and tried to speak to them and communicate his joy and love of
everything this fine afternoon of life. Everybody laughed; some slapped him on the back. Dean
rushed over and paid the policemen the four pesos and shook hands and grinned and bowed with
them. Then he jumped in the car, and the girls we had known, even Venezuela, who was wakened
for the farewell, gathered around the car, huddling in their flimsy duds, and chattered good-bys and
kissed us, and Venezuela even began to weep-though not for us, we knew, not altogether for us, yet
enough and good enough. My dusky darling love had disappeared in the shadows inside. It was all
over. We pulled out and left joys and celebrations over hundreds of pesos behind us, and it didn't
seem like a bad day's work. The haunting mambo followed us a few blocks. It was all over.
"Good-by, Gregoria!" cried Dean, blowing it a kiss.
Victor was proud of us and proud of himself. "Now yo-a like bath?" he asked. Yes, we all wanted
wonderful bath.
And he directed us to the strangest thing in the world: it was an ordinary American-type bathhouse
one mile out of town on the highway, full of kids splashing in a pool and showers inside a stone
building for a few centavos a crack, with soap and towel from the attendant. Besides this, it was
also a sad kiddy park with swings and a broken-down merry-go-round, and in the fading red sun it
seemed so strange and so beautiful. Stan and I got towels and jumped right into ice-cold showers
inside and came out refreshed and new. Dean didn't bother with a shower, and we saw him far
across the sad park, strolling arm in arm with good Victor and chatting volubly and pleasantly and
even leaning excitedly toward him to make a point, and pounding his fist. Then they resumed the
arm-in-arm position and strolled. The time was coming to say good-by to Victor, so Dean was
taking the opportunity to have moments alone with him and to inspect the park and get his views on
things in general and in all dig him as only Dean could do.
Victor was very sad now that we had to go. "You come back Gregoria, see me?"
"Sure, man!" said Dean. He even promised to take Victor back to the States if he so wished it.
Victor said he would have to mull this over.
"I got wife and kid-ain't got a money-I see." His sweet polite smile glowed in the redness as we
waved to him from the car. Behind him were the sad park and the children.
6
Immediately outside Gregoria the road began to drop, great trees arose on each side, and in the
trees as it grew dark we heard the great roar of billions of insects that sounded like one continuous
high-screeching cry. "Whoo!" said Dean, and he turned on his headlights and they weren't working.' 
"What! what! damn now what?" And he punched and fumed at his dashboard. "Oh, my, we'll have
to drive through the jungle without lights, think of the horror of that, the only time I'll see is when
another car comes by and there just aren't any cars! And of course no lights? Oh, what'll we do,
dammit?" "Let's just drive. Maybe we ought to go back, though?" "No, never-never! Let's go on. I
can barely see the road. We'll make it." And now we shot in inky darkness through the scream of
insects, and the great, rank, almost rotten smell descended, and we remembered and realized that
the map indicated just after Gregoria the beginning of the Tropic of Cancer. "We're in a new tropic!
No wonder the smell! Smell it!" I stuck my head out the window; bugs smashed at my face; a great
screech rose the moment I cocked my ear to the wind. Suddenly our lights were working again and
they poked ahead, illuminating the lonely road that ran between solid walls of drooping, snaky trees
as high as a hundred feet.
"Son-of-a-bitch!" yelled Stan in the back. "Hot damn!" He was still so high. We suddenly realized
he was still high and the jungle and troubles made no difference to his happy soul. We began
laughing, all of us.
"To hell with it! We'll just throw ourselves on the gawd-damn jungle, we'll sleep in it tonight, let's
go!" yelled Dean. "Ole Stan is right. Ole Stan don't care! He's so high on those women and that tea
and that crazy out-of-this-world impossi-ble-to-absorb mambo blasting so loud that my eardrums
still beat to it-wheel he's so high he knows what he's doing!" We took off our T-shirts and roared
through the jungle, bare-chested. No towns, nothing, lost jungle, miles and miles, and down-going,
getting hotter, the insects screaming louder, the vegetation growing higher, the smell ranker and
hotter until we began to get used to it and like it. "I'd just like to get naked and roll and roll in that
jungle," said Dean. "No, hell, man, that's what I'm going to do soon's I find a good spot." And
suddenly Limon appeared before us, a jungle town, a few brown lights, dark shadows, enormous
skies overhead, and a cluster of men in front of a jumble of woodshacks-a tropical crossroads. We
stopped in the unimaginable softness. It was as hot as the inside of a baker's oven on a June night in
New Orleans. All up and down the street whole families were sitting around in the dark, chatting;
occasional girls came by, but extremely young and only curious to see what we looked like. They
were barefoot and dirty. We leaned on the wooden porch of a broken-down general store with sacks
of flour and fresh pineapple rotting with flies on the counter. There was one oil lamp in here, and
outside a few more brown lights, and the rest all black, black, black. Now of course we were so
tired we had to sleep at once and moved the car a few yards down a dirt road to the backside of
town. It was so incredibly hot it was impossible to sleep. So Dean took a blanket and laid it out on
the soft, hot sand in the road and flopped out. Stan was stretched on the front seat of the Ford with
both doors open for a draft, but there wasn't even the faintest puff of a wind. I, in the back seat,
suffered in a pool of sweat. I got out of the car and stood swaying in the blackness. The whole town
had instantly gone to bed; the only noise now was barking dogs. How could I ever sleep? 
Thousands of mosquitoes had already bitten all of us on chest and arms and ankles. Then a bright
idea came to me: I jumped up on the steel roof of the car and stretched out flat on my back. Still
there was no breeze, but the steel had an element of coolness in it and dried my back of sweat,
clotting up thousands of dead bugs into cakes on my skin, and I realized the jungle takes you over
and you become it. Lying on the top of the car with my face to the black sky was like lying in a
closed trunk on a summer night. For the first time in my life the weather was not something that
touched me, that caressed me, froze or sweated me, but became me. The atmosphere and I became
the same. Soft infinitesimal showers of microscopic bugs fanned down on my face as I slept, and
they were extremely pleasant and soothing. The sky was starless, utterly unseen and heavy. I could
lie there all night long with my face exposed to the heavens, and it would do me no more harm than
a velvet drape drawn over me. The dead bugs mingled with my blood; the live mosquitoes
exchanged further portions; I began to tingle all over and to smell of the rank, hot, and rotten jungle,
all over from hair and face to feet and toes. Of course I was barefoot. To minimize the sweat I put
on my bug-smeared T-shirt and lay back again. A huddle of darkness on the blacker road showed
where Dean was sleeping. I could hear him snoring. Stan was snoring too.
Occasionally a dim light flashed in town, and this was the sheriff making his rounds with a weak
flashlight and mumbling to himself in the jungle night. Then I saw his light jiggling toward us and
heard his footfalls coming soft on the mats of sand and vegetation. He stopped and flashed the car. I
sat up and looked at him. In a quivering, almost querulous, and extremely tender voice he said,
"Dormiendo?" indicating Dean in the road. I knew this meant "sleep."
"Si, dormiendo."
"Bueno, bueno" he said to himself and with reluctance and sadness turned away and went back to
his lonely rounds. Such lovely policemen God hath never wrought in America. No suspicions, no
fuss, no bother: he was the guardian of the sleeping town, period.
I went back to my bed of steel and stretched out with my arms spread. I didn't even know if
branches or open sky were directly above me, and it made no difference. I opened my mouth to it
and drew deep breaths of jungle atmosphere. It was not air, never air, but the palpable and living
emanation of trees and swamp. I stayed awake. Roosters began to crow the dawn across the brakes
somewhere. Still no air, no breeze, no dew, but the same Tropic of Cancer heaviness held us all
pinned to earth, where we belonged and tingled. There was no sign of dawn in the skies. Suddenly I
heard the dogs barking furiously across the dark, and then I heard the faint clip-clop of a horse's
hooves. It came closer and closer. What kind of mad rider in the night would this be? Then I saw an
apparition: a wild horse, white as a ghost, came trotting down the road directly toward Dean.
Behind him the dogs yammered and contended. I couldn't see them, they were dirty old jungle dogs,
but the horse was white as snow and immense and almost phosphorescent and easy to see. I felt no
panic for Dean. The horse saw him and trotted right by his head, passed the car like a ship, 
whinnied softly, and continued on through town, bedeviled by the dogs, and clip-clopped back to
the jungle on the other side, and all I heard was the faint hoofbeat fading away in the woods. The
dogs subsided and sat to lick themselves. What was this horse? What myth and ghost, what spirit? I
told Dean about it when he woke up. He thought I'd been dreaming. Then he recalled faintly
dreaming of a white horse, and I told him it had been no dream. Stan Shephard slowly woke up.
The faintest movements, and we were sweating profusely again. It was still pitch dark. "Let's start
the car and blow some air!" I cried. "I'm dying of heat." "Right!" We roared out of town and
continued along the mad highway with our hair flying. Dawn came rapidly in a gray haze, revealing
dense swamps sunk on both sides, with tall, forlorn, viny trees leaning and bowing over tangled
bottoms. We bowled right along the railroad tracks for a while. The strange radio-station antenna of
Ciudad Mante appeared ahead, as if we were in Nebraska. We found a gas station and loaded the
tank just as the last of the jungle-night bugs hurled themselves in a black mass against the bulbs and
fell fluttering at our feet in huge wriggly groups, some of them with wings a good four inches long,
others frightful dragonflies big enough to eat a bird, and thousands of immense yangling
mosquitoes and unnamable spidery insects of all sorts. I hopped up and down on the pavement for
fear of them; I finally ended up in the car with my feet in my hands, looking fearfully at the ground
where they swarmed around our wheels. "Lessgo!" I yelled. Dean and Stan weren't perturbed at all
by the bugs; they calmly drank a couple of bottles of Mission Orange and kicked them away from
the water cooler. Their shirts and pants, like mine, were soaked in the blood and black of thousands
of dead bugs. We smelled our clothes deeply.
"You know, I'm beginning to like this smell," said Stan. "I can't smell myself any more."
"It's a strange, good smell," said Dean. "I'm nor. going to change my shirt till Mexico City, I want
to take it all in and remember it." So off we roared again, creating air for hot. caked faces.
Then the mountains loomed ahead, all green. After this climb we would be on the great central
plateau again and ready to roll ahead to Mexico City. In no time at all we soared to an elevation of
five thousand feet among misty passes that overlooked steaming yellow rivers a mile below. It was
the great River Moctezuma. The Indians along the road began to be extremely weird. They were a
nation in themselves, mountain Indians, shut off from everything else but the Pan-American
Highway. They were short and squat and dark, with bad teeth; they carried immense loads on their
backs. Across enormous vegetated ravines we saw patchworks of agriculture on steep slopes. They
walked up and down those slopes and worked the crops. Dean drove the car five miles an hour to
see. "Whooee, this I never thought existed!" High on the highest peak, as great as any Rocky
Mountain peak, we saw bananas growing. Dean got out of the car to point, to stand around rubbing
his belly. We were on a ledge where a little thatched hut suspended itself over the precipice of the
world. The sun created golden hazes that obscured the Moctezuma, now more than a mile below.
In the yard in front of the hut a little three-year-old Indian girl stood with her finger in her mouth, 
watching us with big brown eyes. "She's probably never seen anybody parked here before in her
entire life!" breathed Dean. "Hel-lo, little girl. How are you? Do you like us?" The little girl looked
away bashfully and pouted. We began to talk and she again examined us with finger in mouth. "Gee,
I wish there was something I could give her! Think of it, being born and living on this ledge-this
ledge representing all you know of life. Her father is probably groping down the ravine with a rope
and getting his pineapples out of a cave and hacking wood at an eighty-degree angle with all the
bottom below. She'll never, never leave here and know anything about the outside world. It's a
nation. Think of the wild chief they must have! They probably, off the road, over that bluff, miles
back, must be even wilder and stranger, yeah, because the Pan-American Highway partially
civilizes this nation on this road. Notice the beads of sweat on her brow," Dean pointed out with a
grimace of pain. "It's not the kind of sweat we have, it's oily and it's always there because it's
always hot the year round and she knows nothing of non-sweat, she was born with sweat and dies
with sweat." The sweat on her little brow was heavy, sluggish; it didn't run; it just stood there and
gleamed like a fine olive oil. "What that must do to their souls! How different they must be in their
private concerns and evaluations and wishes!" Dean drove on with his mouth hanging in awe, ten
miles an hour, desirous to see every possible human being on the road. We climbed and climbed.
As we climbed, the air grew cooler and the Indian girls on the road wore shawls over their heads
and shoulders. They hailed us desperately; we stopped to see. They wanted to sell us little pieces of
rock crystal. Their great brown, innocent eyes looked into ours with such soulful intensity that not
one of us had the slightest sexual thought about them; moreover they were very young, some of
them eleven and looking almost thirty. "Look at those eyes!" breathed Dean. They were like the
eyes of the Virgin Mother when she was a child. We saw in them the tender and forgiving gaze of
Jesus. And they stared unflinching into ours. We rubbed our nervous blue eyes and looked again.
Still they penetrated us with sorrowful and hypnotic gleam. When they talked they suddenly
became frantic and almost silly. In their silence they were themselves. "They've only recently
learned to sell these crystals, since the highway was built about ten years back-up until that time
this entire nation must have been silent!"
The girls yammered around the car. One particularly soulful child gripped at Dean's sweaty arm.
She yammered in Indian. "Ah yes, ah yes, dear one," said Dean tenderly and almost sadly. He got
out of the car and went fishing around in the battered trunk in the back-the same old tortured
American trunk-and pulled out a wristwatch. He showed it to the child. She whimpered with glee.
The others crowded around with amazement. Then Dean poked in the little girl's hand for "the
sweetest and purest and smallest crystal she has personally picked from the mountain for me." He
found one no bigger than a berry. And he handed her the wristwatch dangling. Their mouths
rounded like the mouths of chorister children. The lucky little girl squeezed it to her ragged
breastrobes. They stroked Dean and thanked him. He stood among them with his ragged face to the 
sky, looking for the next and highest and final pass, and seemed like the Prophet that had come to
them. He got back in the car. They hated to see us go. For the longest time, as we mounted a
straight pass, they waved and ran after us. We made a turn and never saw them again, and they were
still running after us. "Ah, this breaks my heart!" cried Dean, punching his chest. "How far do they
carry out these loyalties and wonders! What's going to happen to them? Would they try to follow
the car all the way to Mexico City if we drove slow enough?"
"Yes," I said, for I knew.
We came into the dizzying heights of the Sierra Madre Oriental. The banana trees gleamed golden
in the haze. Great fogs yawned beyond stone walls along the precipice. Below, the Moctezuma was
a thin golden thread in a green jungle mat. Strange crossroad towns on top of the world rolled by,
with shawled Indians watching us from under hatbrims and rebozos. Life was dense, dark, ancient.
They watched Dean, serious and insane at his raving wheel, with eyes of hawks. All had their hands
outstretched. They had come down from the back mountains and higher places to hold forth their
hands for something they thought civilization could offer, and they never dreamed the sadness and
the poor broken delusion of it. They didn't know that a bomb had come that could crack all our
bridges and roads and reduce them to jumbles, and we would be as poor as they someday, and
stretching out our hands in the same, same way. Our broken Ford, old thirties upgoing America
Ford, rattled through them and vanished in dust.
We had reached the approaches of the last plateau. Now the sun was golden, the air keen blue, and
the desert with its occasional rivers a riot of sandy, hot space and sudden Biblical tree shade. Now
Dean was sleeping and Stan driving. The shepherds appeared, dressed as in first times, in long
flowing robes, the women carrying golden bundles of flax, the men staves.
Under great trees on the shimmering desert the shepherds sat and convened, and the sheep moiled
in the sun and raised dust beyond. "Man, man," I yelled to Dean, "wake up and see the shepherds,
wake up and see the golden world that Jesus came from, with your own eyes you can tell!"
He shot his head up from the seat, saw one glimpse of it all in the fading red sun, and dropped back
to sleep. When he woke up he described it to me in detail and said, "Yes, man, I'm glad you told me
to look. Oh, Lord, what shall I do? Where will I go?" He rubbed his belly, he looked to heaven with
red eyes, he almost wept.
The end of our journey impended. Great fields stretched on both sides of us; a noble wind blew
across the occasional immense tree groves and over old missions turning salmon pink in the late
sun. The clouds were close and huge and rose. "Mexico City by dusk!" We'd made it, a total of
nineteen hundred miles from the afternoon yards of Denver to these vast and Biblical areas of the
world, and now we were about to reach the end of the road.
"Shall we change our insect T-shirts?"
"Naw, let's wear them into town, hell's bells." And we drove into Mexico City. 
A brief mountain pass took us suddenly to a height from which we saw all of Mexico City stretched
out in its volcanic crater below and spewing city smokes and early dusklights. Down to it we
zoomed, down Insurgentes Boulevard, straight toward the heart of town at Reforma. Kids played
soccer in enormous sad fields and threw up dust. Taxi-drivers overtook us and wanted to know if
we wanted girls. No, we didn't want girls now. Long, ragged adobe slums stretched out on the
plain; we saw lonely figures in the dimming alleys. Soon night would come. Then the city roared in
and suddenly we were passing crowded cafes and theaters and many lights. Newsboys yelled at us.
Mechanics slouched by, barefoot, with wrenches and rags. Mad barefoot Indian drivers cut across
us and surrounded us and tooted and made frantic traffic. The noise was incredible. No mufflers are
used on Mexican cars. Horns are batted with glee continual. "Whee!" yelled Dean,
"Look out!" He staggered the car through the traffic and played with everybody. He drove like an
Indian. He got on a circular glorietta drive on Reforma Boulevard and rolled around it with its eight
spokes shooting cars at us from all directions, left, right, izquierda, dead ahead, and yelled and
jumped with joy. "This is traffic I've always dreamed of' Everybody goes.'" An ambulance came
balling through. American ambulances dart and weave through traffic with siren blowing; the great
world-wide Fellahin Indian ambulances merely come through at eighty miles an hour in the city
streets, and everybody just has to get out of the way and they don't pause for anybody or any
circumstances and fly straight through. We saw it reeling out of sight on skittering wheels in the
breaking-up moil of dense downtown traffic. The drivers were Indians. People, even old ladies, ran
for buses that never stopped. Young Mexico City businessmen made bets and ran by squads for
buses and athletically jumped them. The bus-drivers were barefoot, sneering and insane, and sat
low and squat in T-shirts at the low, enormous wheels. Ikons burned over them. The lights in the
buses were brown and greenish, and dark faces were lined on wooden benches.
In downtown Mexico City thousands of hipsters in floppy straw hats and long-lapeled jackets over
bare chests padded along the main drag, some of them selling crucifixes and weed in the alleys,
some of them kneeling in beat chapels next to Mexican burlesque shows in sheds. Some alleys
were rubble, with open sewers, and little doors led to closet-size bars stuck in adobe walls. You had
to jump over a ditch to get your drink, and in the bottom of the ditch was the ancient lake of the
Aztec. You came out of the bar with your back to the wall and edged back to the street. They served
coffee mixed with rum and nutmeg. Mambo blared from everywhere. Hundreds of whores lined
themselves along the dark and narrow streets and their sorrowful eyes gleamed at us in the night.
We wandered in a frenzy and a dream. We ate beautiful steaks for forty-eight cents in a strange tiled
Mexican cafeteria with generations of marimba musicians standing at one immense marimba-also
wandering singing guitarists, and old men on corners blowing trumpets. You went by the sour stink
of pulque saloons; they gave you a water glass of cactus juice in there, two cents. Nothing stopped;
the streets were alive all night. Beggars slept wrapped in advertising posters torn off fences. Whole 
families of them sat on the sidewalk, playing little flutes and chuckling in the night. Their bare feet
stuck out, their dim candles burned, all Mexico was one vast Bohemian camp. On corners old
women cut up the boiled heads of cows and wrapped morsels in tortillas and served them with hot
sauce on newspaper napkins. This was the great and final wild uninhibited Fellahin-childlike city
that we knew we would find at the end of the road. Dean walked through with his arms hanging
zombie-like at his sides, his mouth open, his eyes gleaming, and conducted a ragged and holy tour
that lasted till dawn in a field with a boy in a straw hat who laughed and chatted with us and wanted
to play catch, for nothing ever ended.
Then I got fever and became delirious and unconscious. Dysentery. I looked up out of the dark
swirl of my mind and I knew I was on a bed eight thousand feet above sea level, on a roof of the
world, and I knew that I had lived a whole life and many others in the poor atomistic husk of my
fl'esh, and I had all the dreams. And I saw Dean bending over the kitchen table. It was several
nights later and he was leaving Mexico City already. "What you doin, man?" I moaned.
"Poor Sal, poor Sal, got sick. Stan'll take care of you. Now listen to hear if you can in your
sickness: I got my divorce from Camille down here and I'm driving back to Inez in New York
tonight if the car holds out."
"All that again?" I cried.
"All that again, good buddy. Gotta get back to my life. Wish I could stay with you. Pray I can come
back." I grabbed the cramps in my belly and groaned. When I looked up again bold noble Dean was
standing with his old broken trunk and looking down at me. I didn't know who he was any more,
and he knew this, and sympathized, and pulled the blanket over my shoulders. "Yes, yes, yes, I've
got to go now.
Old fever Sal, good-by." And he was gone. Twelve hours later in my sorrowful fever I finally came
to understand that he was gone. By that time he was driving back alone through those banana
mountains, this time at night.
When I got better I realized what a rat he was, but then I had to understand the impossible
complexity of his life, how he had to leave me there, sick, to get on with his wives and woes. "Okay,
old Dean, I'll say nothing."
PART FIVE
Dean drove from Mexico City and saw Victoi again in Gregoria and pushed that old car all the way
to Lake Charles, Louisiana, before the rear end finally dropped on the road as he had always known
it would. So he wired Inez for airplane fare and flew the rest of the way. When he arrived in New
York with the divorce papers in his hands, he and Inez immediately went to Newark and got
married; and that night, telling her everything was all right and not to worry, and making logics
where there was nothing but inestimable sorrowful sweats, he jumped on a bus and roared off again 
across the awful continent to San Francisco to rejoin Camille and the two baby girls. So now he
was three times married, twice divorced, and living with his second wife.
In the fall I myself started back home from Mexico City and one night just over Laredo border in
Dilley, Texas, I was standing on the hot road underneath an arc-lamp with the summer moths
smashing into it when I heard the sound of footsteps from the darkness beyond, and lo, a tall old
man with flowing white hair came clomping by with a pack on his back, and when he saw me as he
passed, he said, "Go moan for man," and clomped on back to his dark. Did this mean that I should
at last go on my pilgrimage on foot on the dark roads around America? I struggled and hurried to
New York, and one night I was standing in a dark street in Manhattan and called up to the window
of a loft where I thought my friends were having a party. But a pretty girl stuck her head out the
window and said, "Yes? Who is it?"
"Sal Paradise," I said, and heard my name resound in the sad and empty street.
"Come on up," she called. "I'm making hot chocolate.," So I went up and there she was, the girl
with the pure and innocent dear eyes that I had always searched for and for so long. We agreed to
love each other madly. In the winter we planned to migrate to San Francisco, bringing all our beat
furniture and broken belongings with us in a jalopy panel truck. I wrote to Dean and told him. He
wrote back a huge letter eighteen thousand words long, all about his young years in Denver, and
said he was coming to get me and personally select the old truck himself and drive us home. We
had six weeks to save up the money for the truck and began working and counting every cent. And
suddenly Dean arrived anyway, five and a half weeks in advance, and nobody had any money to go
through with the plan.
I was taking a walk in the middle of the night and came back to my girl to tell her what I thought
about during my, walk. She stood in the dark little pad with a strange smile. I told her a number of
things and suddenly I noticed the hush in the room and looked around and saw a battered book on
the radio. I knew it was Dean's high-eternity-in-the-afternoon Proust. As in a dream I saw him
tiptoe in from the dark hall in his stocking feet. He couldn't talk any more. He hopped and laughed,
he stuttered and fluttered his hands and said, "Ah-ah-you must listen to hear." We listened, all ears.
But he forgot what he wanted to say. "Really listen-ahem. Look, dear Sal-sweet Laura-I've
come-I'm gone-but wait-ah yes." And he stared with rocky sorrow into his hands. "Can't talk no
more-do you understand that it is-or might be- But listen!" We all listened. He was listening to
sounds in the night. "Yes!" he whispered with awe. "But you see-no need to talk any more-and
further."
"But why did you come so soon, Dean?"
"Ah," he said, looking at me as if for the first time, "so soon, yes. We-we'll know-that is, I don't
know. I came on the railroad pass-cabooses-old hard-bench coaches-Texas- played flute and
wooden sweet potato all the way." He took out his new wooden flute. He played a few squeaky 
notes on it and jumped up and down in his stocking feet. "See?" he said. "But of course, Sal, I can
talk as soon as ever and have many things to say to you in fact with my own little bangtail mind
I've been reading and reading this gone Proust all the way across the country and digging a great
number of things I'll never have TIME to tell you about and we STILL haven't talked of Mexico
and our parting there in fever-but no need to talk. Absolutely, now, yes?"
"All right, we won't talk." And he started telling the story of what he did in LA on the way over in
every possible detail, how he visited a family, had dinner, talked to the father, the sons, the
sisters-what they looked like, what they ate, their furnishings, their thoughts, their interests, their
very souls; it took him three hours of detailed elucidation, and having concluded this he said, "Ah,
but you see what I wanted to REALLY tell you-much later-Arkansas, crossing on train-playing
flute-play cards with boys, my dirty deck- won money, blew sweet-potato solo-for sailors. Long
long awful trip five days and five nights just to SEE you, Sal."
"What about Camille?"
"Gave permission of course-waiting for me. Camille and I all straight forever-and-ever . . ."
"And Inez?"
"I-I-I want her to come back to Frisco with me live other side of town-don't you think? Don't know
why I came." Later he said in a sudden moment of gaping wonder, "Well and yes, of course, I
wanted to see your sweet girl and you-glad of you-love you as ever." He stayed in New York three
days and hastily made preparations to get back on the train with his railroad passes and again
recross the continent, five days and five nights in dusty coaches and hard-bench crummies, and of
course we had no money for a truck and couldn't go back with him. With Inez he spent one night
explaining and sweating and fighting, and she threw him out. A letter came for him, care of me. I
saw it. It was from Camille. "My heart broke when I saw you go across the tracks with your bag. I
pray and pray you get back safe. ... I do want Sal and his friend to come and live on the same
street. ... I know you'll make it but I can't help worrying-now that we've decided everything. . . .
Dear Dean, it's the end of the first half of the century. Welcome with love and kisses to spend the
other half with us. We all wait for you. [Signed] Camille, Amy, and Little Joanie." So Dean's life
was settled with his most constant, most embittered, and best-knowing wife Camille, and I thanked
God for him.
The last time I saw him it was under sad and strange circumstances. Remi Boncoeur had arrived in
New York after having gone around the world several times in ships. I wanted him to meet and
know Dean. They did meet, but Dean couldn't talk any more and said nothing, and Remi turned
away. Remi had gotten tickets for the Duke Ellington concert at the Metropolitan Opera and
insisted Laura and I come with him and his girl. Remi was fat and sad now but still the eager and
formal gentleman, and he wanted to do things the right way, as he emphasized. So he got his bookie
to drive us to the concert in a Cadillac. It was a cold winter night. The Cadillac was parked and 
ready to go. Dean stood outside the windows with his bag, ready to go to Penn Station and on
across the land.
"Good-by, Dean," I said. "I sure wish I didn't have to go to the concert."
"D'you think I can ride to Fortieth Street with you?" he whispered. "Want to be with you as much as
possible, m'boy, and besides it's so durned cold in this here New Yawk ..." I whispered to Remi. No,
he wouldn't have it, he liked me but he didn't like my idiot friends. I wasn't going to start all over
again ruining his planned evenings as I had done at Alfred's in San Francisco in 1947 with Roland
Major.
"Absolutely out of the question, Sal!" Poor Remi, he had a special necktie made for this evening;
on it was painted a replica of the concert tickets, and the names Sal and Laura and Remi and Vicki,
the girl, together with a series of sad jokes and some of his favorite sayings such as "You can't teach
the old maestro a new tune."
So Dean couldn't ride uptown with us and the only thing I could do was sit in the back of the
Cadillac and wave at him. The bookie at the wheel also wanted nothing to do with Dean. Dean,
ragged in a motheaten overcoat he brought specially for the freezing temperatures of the East,
walked off alone, and the last I saw of him he rounded the corner of Seventh Avenue, eyes on the
street ahead, and bent to it again. Poor little Laura, my baby, to whom I'd told everything about
Dean, began almost to cry.
"Oh, we shouldn't let him go like this. What'll we do?" Old Dean's gone, I thought, and out loud I
said, "He'll be all right." And off we went to the sad and disinclined concert for which I had no
stomach whatever and all the time I was thinking of Dean and how he got back on the train and
rode over three thousand miles over that awful land and never knew why he had come anyway,
except to see me.
So in America when the sun goes down and I sit on the old broken-down river pier watching the
long, long skies over New Jersey and sense all that raw land that rolls in one unbelievable huge
bulge over to the West Coast, and all that road going, all the people dreaming in the immensity of it,
and in Iowa I know by now the children must be crying in the land where they let the children cry,
and tonight the stars'll be out, and don't you know that God is Pooh Bear? the evening star must be
drooping and shedding her sparkler dims on the prairie, which is just before the coming of
complete night that blesses the earth, darkens all rivers, cups the peaks and folds the final shore in,
and nobody, nobody knows what's going to happen to anybody besides the forlorn rags of growing
old, I think of Dean Moriarty, I even think of Old Dean Moriarty the father we never found, I think
of Dean Moriarty. 


Hopping a freight out of Los Angeles at high noon one day in late September 1955 I got on a gondola and lay down with my duffel bag under my head and my knees crossed and contemplated the clouds as we rolled north to Santa Barbara. It was a local and I intended to sleep on the beach at Santa Barbara that night and catch either another local to San Luis Obispo the next morning or the firstclass freight all the way to San Francisco at seven p.m. Somewhere near Camarillo where Charlie Parker'd been mad and relaxed back to normal health, a thin old little bum climbed into my


4

gondola as we headed into a siding to give a train right of way and looked surprised to see me there. He established himself at the other end of the gondola and lay down, facing me, with his head on his own miserably small pack and said nothing. By and by they blew the highball whistle after the eastbound freight had smashed through on the main line and we pulled out as the air got colder and fog began to blow from the sea over the warm valleys of the coast. Both the little bum and I, after unsuccessful attempts to huddle on the cold steel in wraparounds, got up and paced back and forth and jumped and flapped arms at each our end of the gon. Pretty soon we headed into another siding at a small railroad town and I figured I needed a poor-boy of Tokay wine to complete the cold dusk run to Santa Barbara. "Will you watch my pack while I run over there and get a bottle of wine?"

"Sure thing."

I jumped over the side and ran across Highway 101 to the store, and bought, besides wine, a little bread and candy. I ran back to my freight train which had another fifteen minutes to wait in the now warm sunny scene. But it was late afternoon and bound to get cold soon. The little bum was sitting crosslegged at his end before a pitiful repast of one can of sardines. I took pity on him and went over and said, "How about a little wine to warm you up? Maybe you'd like some bread and cheese with your sardines."

"Sure thing." He spoke from far away inside a little meek voice-box afraid or unwilling to assert himself. I'd bought the cheese three days ago in Mexico City before the long cheap bus trip across Zacatecas and Durango and Chihuahua two thousand long miles to the border at El Paso. He ate the cheese and bread and drank the wine with gusto and gratitude. I was


5

pleased. I reminded myself of the line in the Diamond Sutra that says, "Practice charity without holding in mind any conceptions about charity, for charity after all is just a word." I was very devout in those days and was practicing my religious devotions almost to perfection. Since then I've become a little hypocritical about my lip-service and a little tired and cynical. Because now I am grown so old and neutral. . . . But then I really believed in the reality of charity and kindness and humility and zeal and neutral tranquillity and wisdom and ecstasy, and I believed that I was an oldtime bhikku in modern clothes wandering the world (usually the immense triangular arc of New York to Mexico City to San Francisco) in order to turn the wheel of the True Meaning, or Dharma, and gain merit for myself as a future Buddha (Awakener) and as a future Hero in Paradise. I had not met Japhy Ryder yet, I was about to the next week, or heard anything about "Dharma Bums" although at this time I was a perfect Dharma Bum myself and considered myself a religious wanderer. The little bum in the gondola solidified all my beliefs by warming up to the wine and talking and finally whipping out a tiny slip of paper which contained a prayer by Saint Teresa announcing that after her death she will return to the earth by showering it with roses from heaven, forever, for all living creatures.

"Where did you get this?" I asked.

"Oh, I cut it out of a reading-room magazine in Los Angeles couple of years ago. I always carry it, with me."

"And you squat in boxcars and read it?"

"Most every day." He talked not much more than this, didn't amplify on the subject of Saint Teresa, and was very modest about his religion and told me little about his personal life. He is the kind of thin quiet little bum nobody pays much


6

attention to even in Skid Row, let alone Main Street. If a cop hustled him off, he hustled, and disappeared, and if yard dicks were around in bigcity yards when a freight was pulling out, chances are they never got a sight of the little man hiding in the weeds and hopping on in the shadows. When I told him I was planning to hop the Zipper firstclass freight train the next night he said, "Ah you mean the Midnight Ghost."

"Is that what you call the Zipper?"

"You musta been a railroad man on that railroad."

"I was, I was a brakeman on the S.P."

"Well, we bums call it the Midnight Ghost cause you get on it at L.A. and nobody sees you till you get to San Francisco in the morning the thing flies so fast."

"Eighty miles an hour on the straightaways, pap."

"That's right but it gits mighty cold at night when you're flyin up that coast north of Gavioty and up around Surf."

"Surf that's right, then the mountains down south of Margarita."

"Margarity, that's right, but I've rid that Midnight Ghost more times'n I can count I guess."

"How many years been since you've been home?"

"More years than I care to count I guess. Ohio was where I was from."

But the train got started, the wind grew cold and foggy again, and we spent the following hour and a half doing everything in our power and will power not to freeze and chatter-teeth too much. I'd huddle and meditate on the warmth, the actual warmth of God, to obviate the cold; then I'd jump up and flap my arms and legs and sing. But the little bum had more patience than I had and just lay there most of the time chewing his cud in forlorn bitterlipped thought. My teeth


7

were chattering, my lips blue. By dark we saw with relief the familiar mountains of Santa Barbara taking shape and soon we'd be stopped and warm in the warm starlit night by the tracks.

I bade farewell to the little bum of Saint Teresa at the crossing, where we jumped off, and went to sleep the night in the sand in my blankets, far down the beach at the foot of a cliff where cops wouldn't see me and drive me away. I cooked hot-dogs on freshly cut and sharpened sticks over the coals of a big wood fire, and heated a can of beans and a can of cheese macaroni in the redhot hollows, and drank my newly bought wine, and exulted in one of the most pleasant nights of my life. I waded in the water and dunked a little and stood looking up at the splendorous night sky, Avalokitesvara's ten-wondered universe of dark and diamonds. "Well, Ray," sez I, glad, "only a few miles to go. You've done it again." Happy. Just in my swim shorts, barefooted, wild-haired, in the red fire dark, singing, swigging wine, spitting, jumping, runningthat's the way to live. All alone and free in the soft sands of the beach by the sigh of the sea out there, with the Ma-Wink fallopian virgin warm stars reflecting on the outer channel fluid belly waters. And if your cans are redhot and you can't hold them in your hands, just use good old railroad gloves, that's all. I let the food cool a little to enjoy more wine and my thoughts. I sat crosslegged in the sand and contemplated my life. Well, there, and what difference did it make? "What's going to happen to me up ahead?" Then the wine got to work on my taste buds and before long I had to pitch into those hotdogs, biting them right off the end of the stick spit, and chomp chomp, and dig down into the two tasty cans with the old pack spoon, spooning up rich bites of hot beans and pork, or of macaroni with


8

sizzling hot sauce, and maybe a little sand thrown in. "And how many grains of sand are there on this beach?" I think. "Why, as many grains of sand as there are stars in that sky!" (chomp chomp) and if so "How many human beings have there been, in fact how many living creatures have there been, since before the less part of beginningless time? Why, oy, I reckon you would have to calculate the number of grains of sand on this beach and on every star in the sky, in every one of the ten thousand great chilicosms, which would be a number of sand grains uncomputable by IBM and Burroughs too, why boy I don't rightly know" (swig of wine) "I don't rightly know but it must be a couple umpteen trillion sextillion infideled and busted up unnumberable number of roses that sweet Saint Teresa and that fine little old man are now this minute showering on your head, with lilies."

Then, meal done, wiping my lips with my red bandana, I washed up the dishes in the salt sea, kicked a few clods of sand, wandered around, wiped them, put them away, stuck the old spoon back in the salty pack, and lay down curled in my blanket for a night's good and just rest. Waking up in the middle of the night, "Wa? Where am I, what is the basketbally game of eternity the girls are playing here by me in the old house of my life, the house isn't on fire is it?" but it's only the banding rush of waves piling up higher closer high tide to my blanket bed. "I be as hard and old as a conch shell," and I go to sleep and dream that while sleeping I use up three slices of bread breathing. . . . Ah poor mind of man, and lonely man alone on the beach, and God watching with intent smile I'd say. . . . And I dreamed of home long ago in New England, my little kitkats trying to go a thousand miles following me on the road across America, and my mother with a pack on her


9

back, and my father running after the ephemeral uncatchable train, and I dreamed and woke up to a gray dawn, saw it, sniffed (because I had seen all the horizon shift as if a sceneshifter had hurried to put it back in place and make me believe in its reality), and went back to sleep, turning over. "It's all the same thing," I heard my voice say in the void that's highly embrace-able during sleep.

 

2
The little Saint Teresa bum was the first genuine Dharma Bum I'd met, and the second was the number one Dharma Bum of them all and in fact it was he, Japhy Ryder, who coined the phrase. Japhy Ryder was a kid from eastern Oregon brought up in a log cabin deep in the woods with his father and mother and sister, from the beginning a woods boy, an axman, farmer, interested in animals and Indian lore so that when he finally got to college by hook or crook he was already well equipped for Ms early studies in anthropology and later in Indian myth and in the actual texts of Indian mythology. Finally he learned Chinese and Japanese and became an Oriental scholar and discovered the greatest Dharma Bums of them all, the Zen Lunatics of China and Japan. At the same time, being a Northwest boy with idealistic tendencies, he got interested in oldfashioned I.W.W. anarchism and learned


10

11


 


to play the guitar and sing old worker songs to go with his Indian songs and general folksong interests. I first saw him walking down the street in San Francisco the following week (after hitchhiking the rest of the way from Santa Barbara in one long zipping ride given me, as though anybody'll believe this, by a beautiful darling young blonde in a snow-white strapless bathing suit and barefooted with a gold bracelet on her ankle, driving a next-year's cinnamon-red Lincoln  Mercury, who wanted benzedrine so she could drive all the way to the City and when I said I had some in my duffel bag yelled "Crazy!") I saw Japhy loping along in that curious long stride of the mountainclimber, with a small  knapsack on his  back  filled with books and toothbrushes and whatnot which was his small "goin-to-the-city" knapsack as apart from his big full rucksack complete with sleeping bag, poncho, and cookpots. He wore a little goatee,  strangely  Oriental-looking with  his  somewhat slanted green eyes, but he didn't look like a Bohemian at all, and was far from being a Bohemian (a hanger-onner around the arts). He was wiry, suntanned, vigorous, open, all howdies and glad talk and even yelling hello to bums on the street and when asked a question answered right off the bat from the top or bottom of his mind I don't know which and always in a sprightly sparkling way.

"Where did you meet Ray Smith?" they asked him when we walked into The Place, the favorite bar of the hepcats around the Beach.

"Oh I always meet my Bodhisattvas in the street!" he yelled, and ordered beers.

It was a great night, a historic night in more ways than one. He and some other poets (he also wrote poetry and translated Chinese and Japanese poetry into English) were scheduled to


11

give a poetry reading at the Gallery Six in town. They were all meeting in the bar and getting high. But as they stood and sat around I saw that he was the only one who didn't look like a poet, though poet he was indeed. The other poets were either hornrimmed intellectual  hepcats with wild  black  hair like Alvah Goldbook, or delicate pale handsome poets like Ike O'Shay (in a suit), or out-of-this-world genteel-looking Renaissance Italians like Francis DaPavia (who looks like a young priest), or bow-tied wild-haired old anarchist fuds like Rheinhold Cacoethes, or big fat bespectacled quiet booboos like Warren Coughlin. And all the other hopeful poets were standing around, in various costumes, worn-at-the-sleeves corduroy jackets, scuffly shoes, books sticking out of their pockets. But Japhy was in rough worlungman's clothes he'd bought secondhand in Goodwill stores to serve him on mountain climbs and hikes and for sitting in the open at night, for campfires, for hitchhiking up and down the Coast. In fact in his little knapsack he also had a funny green alpine cap that he wore when he got to the foot of a mountain, usually with a yodel, before starting to tromp up a few thousand feet. He wore mountain-climbing boots, expensive ones, his pride and joy, Italian make, in which he clomped around over the sawdust floor of the bar like an oldtime lumberjack. Japhy wasn't big, just about five foot seven, but strong and wiry and fast and muscular. His face was a mask of woeful bone, but his eyes twinkled like the eyes of old giggling sages of China, over that little goatee, to offset the rough look of his handsome face. His teeth were a little brown, from early backwoods neglect, but you never noticed that and he opened his mouth wide to guffaw at jokes. Sometimes he'd quiet down and just stare sadly at the floor, like a man whittling. He was merry at times. He showed great sym-


12

pathetic interest in me and in the story about the little Saint Teresa bum and the stories I told him about my own experiences hopping freights or hitchhiking or hiking in woods. He claimed at once that I was a great "Bodhisattva," meaning "great wise being" or "great wise angel," and that I was ornamenting this world with my sincerity. We had the same favorite Buddhist saint, too: Avalokitesvara, or, in Japanese, Kwan-non the Eleven-Headed. He knew all the details of Tibetan, Chinese,  Mahayana,  Hinayana, Japanese  and  even Burmese Buddhism but I warned him at once I didn't give a goddamn about the mythology and all the names and national flavors of Buddhism, but was just interested in the first of Sakyamuni's four noble truths, All life is suffering. And to an extent interested in the third, The suppression of suffering can be achieved, which I didn't quite believe was possible then. (I hadn't yet digested the Lankavatara Scripture which eventually shows you that there's nothing in the world but the mind itself, and therefore  all's possible including the suppression of suffering.) Japhy's buddy was the aforementioned booboo big old goodhearted Warren Coughlin a hundred and eighty pounds of poet meat, who was advertised by Japhy (privately in my ear) as being more than meets the eye. "Who is he?"

"He's my big best friend from up in Oregon, we've known each other a long time. At first you think he's slow and stupid but actually he's a shining diamond. You'll see. Don't let him cut you to ribbons. He'll make the top of your head fly away, boy, with a choice chance word." "Why?" "He's a great mysterious Bodhisattva I think maybe a rein-


13

carnation of Asagna the great Mahayana scholar of the old centuries."

"And who am I?"

"I dunno, maybe you're Goat."

"Goat?"

"Maybe you're Mudface."

"Who's Mudface?"

"Mudface is the mud in your goatface. What would you say if someone was asked the question 'Does a dog have the Buddha nature?' and said 'Woof!' "

"I'd say that was a lot of silly Zen Buddhism." This took Japhy back a bit. "Lissen Japhy," I said, "I'm not a Zen Buddhist, I'm a serious Buddhist, I'm an oldfashioned dreamy Hinayana coward of later Mahayanism," and so forth into the night, my contention being that Zen Buddhism didn't concentrate on kindness so much as on confusing the intellect to make it perceive the illusion of all sources of things. "It's mean" I complained. "All those Zen Masters throwing young kids in the mud because they can't answer their silly word questions."

"That's because they want them to realize mud is better than words, boy." But I can't recreate the exact (will try) brilliance of all Japhy's answers and come-backs and come-ons with which he had me on pins and needles all the rime and did eventually stick something in my crystal head that made me change my plans in life.

Anyway I followed the whole gang of howling poets to the reading at Gallery Six that night, which was, among other important things, the night of the birth of the San Francisco Poetry Renaissance. Everyone was there. It was a mad night. And I was the one who got things jumping by going around col-


14 

lecting dimes and quarters from the rather stiff audience standing around in the gallery and coming back with three huge gallon jugs of California Burgundy and getting them all piffed so that by eleven o'clock when Alvah Goldbook was reading his, wailing his poem "Wail" drunk with arms outspread everybody was yelling "Go! Go! Go!" (like a jam session) and old Rheinhold Cacoethes the father of the Frisco poetry scene was wiping his tears in gladness. Japhy himself read his fine poems about Coyote the God of the North American Plateau Indians (I think), at least the God of the Northwest Indians, Kwakiutl and what-all. "Fuck you! sang Coyote, and ran away!" read Japhy to the distinguished audience, making them all howl with joy, it was so pure, fuck being a dirty word that comes out clean. And he had his tender lyrical lines, like the ones about bears eating berries, showing his love of animals, and great mystery lines about oxen on the Mongolian road showing his knowledge of Oriental literature even on to Hsuan Tsung the great Chinese monk who walked from China to Tibet, Lanchow to Kashgar and Mongolia carrying a stick of incense in his hand. Then Japhy showed bis sudden barroom humor with lines about Coyote bringing goodies. And bis anarchistic ideas about how Americans don't know how to live, with lines about commuters being trapped in living rooms that come from poor trees felled by chainsaws (showing here, also, bis background as a logger up north). His voice was deep and resonant and somehow brave, like the voice of oldtime American heroes and orators. Something earnest and strong and humanly hopeful I liked about him, while the other poets were either too dainty in their aestheticism, or too hysterically cynical to hope for anything, or too abstract and indoorsy, or too political, or like Coughlin too incomprehensible to under-


15

stand (big Coughlin saying things about "unclarified processes" though where Coughlin did say that revelation was a personal thing I noticed the strong Buddhist and idealistic feeling of Japhy, which he'd shared with goodhearted Coughlin in their buddy days at college, as I had shared mine with Alvah in the Eastern scene and with others less apocalyptical and straighter but in no sense more sympathetic and tearful).

Meanwhile scores of people stood around in the darkened gallery straining to hear every word of the amazing poetry reading as I wandered from group to group, facing them and facing away from the stage, urging them to glug a slug from the jug, or wandered back and sat on the right side of the stage giving out little wows and yesses of approval and even whole sentences of comment with nobody's invitation but in the general gaiety nobody's disapproval either. It was a great night. Delicate Francis DaPavia read, from delicate onionskin, yellow pages, or pink, which he kept flipping carefully with long white fingers, the poems of bis dead chum Altman who'd eaten too much peyote in Chihuahua (or died of polio, one) but read none of his own poemsa charming elegy in itself to the memory of the dead young poet, enough to draw tears from the Cervantes of Chapter Seven, and read them in a delicate Englishy voice that had me crying with inside laughter though I later got to know Francis and liked him.

Among the people standing in the audience was Rosie Bu-chanan, a girl with a short haircut, red-haired, bony, handsome, a real gone chick and friend of everybody of any consequence on the Beach, who'd been a painter's model and a writer herself and was bubbling over with excitement at that time because she was in love with my old buddy Cody. "Great, hey Rosie?" I yelled, and she took a big slug from my jug and shined eyes


16

at me. Cody just stood behind her with both arms around her waist. Between poets, Rheinhold Cacoethes, in his bow tie and shabby old coat, would get up and make a little funny speech in his snide funny voice and introduce the next reader; but as I say come eleven-thirty when all the poems were read and everybody was milling around wondering what had happened and what would come next in American poetry, he was wiping his eyes with his handkerchief. And we all got together with him, the poets, and drove in several cars to Chinatown for a big fabulous dinner off the Chinese menu, with chopsticks, yelling conversation in the middle of the night in one of those free-swinging great Chinese restaurants of San Francisco. This happened to be Japhy's favorite Chinese restaurant, Nam Yuen, and he showed me how to order and how to eat with chopsticks and told anecdotes about the Zen Lunatics of the Orient and had me going so glad (and we had a bottle of wine on the table) that finally I went over to an old cook in the doorway of the kitchen and asked him "Why did Bodhidharma come from the West?" (Bodhidharma was the Indian who brought Buddhism eastward to China.)

"I don't care," said the old cook, with lidded eyes, and I told Japhy and he said, "Perfect answer, absolutely perfect. Now you know what I mean by Zen."

I had a lot more to learn, too. Especially about how to handle girlsJaphy's incomparable Zen Lunatic way, which I got a chance to see firsthand the following week.


 17

3
In Berkeley I was living with Alvah Goldbook in his little rose-covered cottage in the backyard of a bigger house on Milvia Street. The old rotten porch slanted forward to the ground, among vines, with a nice old rocking chair that I sat in every morning to read my Diamond Sutra. The yard was full of tomato plants about to ripen, and mint, mint, everything smelling of mint, and one fine old tree that I loved to sit under and meditate on those cool perfect starry California October nights unmatched anywhere in the world. We had a perfect little kitchen with a gas stove, but no icebox, but no matter. We also had a perfect little bathroom with a tub and hot water, and one main room, covered with pillows and floor mats of straw and mattresses to sleep on, and books, books, hundreds of books everything from Catullus to Pound to Blyth to albums of Bach and Beethoven (and even one swinging Ella Fitzgerald album with Clark Terry very interesting on trumpet) and a good three-speed Webcor phonograph that played loud enough to blast the roof off: and the roof nothing but plywood, the walls too, through which one night in one of our Zen Lunatic drunks I put my fist in glee and Coughlin saw me and put his head through about three inches. About a mile from there, way down Milvia and then upslope


18

 

toward the campus of the University of California, behind another big old house on a quiet street (Hillegass), Japhy lived in his own shack which was infinitely smaller than ours, about twelve by twelve, with nothing in it but typical Japhy appurtenances that showed his belief in the simple monastic lifeno chairs at all, not even one sentimental rocking chair, but just straw mats. In the corner was his famous rucksack with cleaned-up pots and pans all fitting into one another in a compact unit and all tied and put away inside a knotted-up blue bandana. Then his Japanese wooden pata shoes, which he never used, and a pair of black inside-pata socks to pad around softly in over his pretty straw mats, just room for your four toes on one side and your big toe on the other. He had a slew of orange crates all filled with beautiful scholarly books, some of them in Oriental languages, all the great sutras, comments on sutras, the complete works of D. T. Suzuki and a fine quadruple-volume edition of Japanese haikus. He also had an immense collection of valuable general poetry. In fact if a thief should have broken in there the only things of real value were the books. Japhy's clothes were all old hand-me-downs bought secondhand with a bemused and happy expression in Goodwill and Salvation Army stores: wool socks darned, colored undershirts, jeans, workshirts, moccasin shoes, and a few turtleneck sweaters that he wore one on top the other in the cold mountain nights of the High Sierras in California and the High Cascades of Washington and Oregon on the long incredible jaunts that sometimes lasted weeks and weeks with just a few pounds of dried food in his pack. A few orange crates made his table, on which, one late sunny afternoon as I arrived, was steaming a peaceful cup of tea at his side as he bent his serious head to the Chinese signs of the poet Han Shan. Coughlin had given me


19

the address and I came there, seeing first Japhy's bicycle on the lawn in front of the big house out front (where his landlady lived) then the few odd boulders and rocks and funny little trees he'd brought back from mountain jaunts to set out in his own "Japanese tea garden" or "tea-house garden," as there was a convenient pine tree soughing over his little domicile.

A peacefuler scene I never saw than when, in that rather nippy late red afternoon, I simply opened his little door and looked in and saw him at the end of the little shack, sitting crosslegged on a Paisley pillow on a straw mat, with his spectacles on, making him look old and scholarly and wise, with book on lap and the little tin teapot and porcelain cup steaming at his side. He looked up very peacefully, saw who it was, said, "Ray, come in," and bent his eyes again to the script.

"What you doing?"

"Translating Han Shan's great poem called 'Cold Mountain' written a thousand years ago some of it scribbled on the sides of cliffs hundreds of miles away from any other living beings."

"Wow."

"When you come into this house though you've got to take your shoes off, see those straw mats, you can ruin 'em with shoes." So I took my softsoled blue cloth shoes off and laid them dutifully by the door and he threw me a pillow and I sat crosslegged along the little wooden board wall and he offered me a cup of hot tea. "Did you ever read the Book of Tea?" said he.

"No, what's that?"

"It's a scholarly treatise on how to make tea utilizing all the knowledge of two thousand years about tea-brewing. Some of the descriptions of the effect of the first sip of tea, and the second, and the third, are really wild and ecstatic."


2

"Those guys got high on nothing, hey?"

"Sip your tea and you'll see; this is good green tea." It was good and I immediately felt calm and warm. "Want me to read you parts of this Han Shan poem? Want me to tell you about Han Shan?"

"Yeah."

"Han Shan you see was a Chinese scholar who got sick of the big city and the world and took off to hide in the mountains."

"Say, that sounds like you."

"In those days you could really do that. He stayed in caves not far from a Buddhist monastery in the T'ang Hsing district of T'ien Tai and his only human friend was the funny Zen Lunatic Shih-te who had a job sweeping out the monastery with a straw broom. Shih-te was a poet too but he never wrote much down. Every now and then Han Shan would come down from Cold Mountain in his bark clothing and come into the warm kitchen and wait for food, but none of the monks would ever feed him because he didn't want to join the order and answer the meditation bell three times a day. You see why in some of his utterances, likelisten and I'll look here and read from the Chinese," and I bent over his shoulder and watched him read from big wild crowtracks of Chinese signs: "Climbing up Cold Mountain path, Cold Mountain path goes on and on, long gorge choked with scree and boulders, wide creek and mist-blurred grass, moss is slippery though there's been no rain, pine sings but there's no wind, who can leap the world's ties and sit with me among white clouds?"

"Wow."

"Course that's my own translation into English, you see


21

there are five signs for each line and I have to put in Western prepositions and articles and such."

"Why don't you just translate it as it is, five signs, five words? What's those first five signs?"

"Sign for climbing, sign for up, sign for cold, sign for mountain, sign for path."

"Well then, translate it 'Climbing up Cold Mountain path.' "

"Yeah, but what do you do with the sign for long, sign for gorge, sign for choke, sign for avalanche, sign for boulders?"

"Where's that?"

"That's the third line, would have to read 'Long gorge choke avalanche boulders.' "

"Well that's even better!"

"Well yeah, I thought of that, but I have to have this pass the approval of Chinese scholars here at the university and have it clear in English."

"Boy what a great thing this is," I said looking around at the little shack, "and you sitting here so very quietly at this very quiet hour studying all alone with your glasses. . . ."

"Ray what you got to do is go climb a mountain with me soon. How would you like to climb Matterhorn?"

"Great! Where's that?"

"Up in the High Sierras. We can go there with Henry Morley in his car and bring our packs and take off from the lake. I could carry all the food and stuff we need in my rucksack and you could borrow Alvah's small knapsack and carry extra socks and shoes and stuff."

"What's these signs mean?"

"These signs mean that Han Shan came down from the mountain after many years roaming around up there, to see his


22   

folks in town, says, 'Till recently I stayed at Cold Mountain, et cetera, yesterday I called on friends and family, more than half had gone to the Yellow Springs,' that means death, the Yellow Springs, 'now morning I face my lone shadow, I can't study with both eyes full of tears.' "

"That's like you too, Japhy, studying with eyes full of tears."

"My eyes aren't full of tears!"

"Aren't they going to be after a long long time?"

"They certainly will, Ray . . . and look here, 'In the mountains it's cold, it's always been cold not just this year,' see, he's real high, maybe twelve thousand or thirteen thousand feet or more, way up there, and says, 'Jagged scarps always snowed in, woods in the dark ravines spitting mist, grass is still sprouting at the end of June, leaves begin to fall in early August, and here am I high as a junkey' "

"As a junkey!"

"That's my own translation, he actually says here am I as high as the sensualist in the city below, but I made it modern and high translation."

"Great." I wondered why Han Shan was Japhy's hero.

"Because," said he, "he was a poet, a mountain man, a Buddhist dedicated to the principle of meditation on the essence of all things, a vegetarian too by the way though I haven't got on that kick from figuring maybe in this modern world to be a vegetarian is to split hairs a little since all sentient beings eat what they can. And he was a man of solitude who could take off by himself and live purely and true to himself."

"That sounds like you too."

"And like you too, Ray, I haven't forgotten what you told me about how you made it in the woods meditating in North


23

Carolina and all." Japhy was very sad, subdued, I'd never seen him so quiet, melancholy, thoughtful his voice was as tender as a mother's, he seemed to be talking from far away to a poor yearning creature (me) who needed to hear his message he wasn't putting anything on he was in a bit of a trance.

"Have you been meditating today?"

"Yeah I meditate first thing in the morning before breakfast and I always meditate a long time in the afternoon unless I'm interrupted."

"Who interrupts you?"

"Oh, people. Coughlin sometimes, and Alvah came yesterday, and Rol Sturlason, and I got this girl comes over to play yabyum."

"Yabyum? What's that?"

"Don't you know about yabyum, Smith? I'll tell you later." He seemed to be too sad to talk about yabyum, which I found out about a couple of nights later. We talked a while longer about Han Shan and poems on cliffs and as I was going away his friend Rol Sturlason, a tall blond goodlooking kid, came in to discuss his coming trip to Japan with him. This Rol Sturlason was interested in the famous Ryoanji rock garden of Shokokuji monastery in Kyoto, which is nothing but old boulders placed in such a way, supposedly mystically aesthetic, as to cause thousands of tourists and monks every year to journey there to stare at the boulders in the sand and thereby gain peace of mind. I have never met such weird yet serious and earnest people. I never saw Rol Sturlason again, he went to Japan soon after, but I can't forget what he said about the boulders, to my question, "Well who placed them in that certain way that's so great?"

"Nobody knows, some monk, or monks, long ago. But there


24  

is a definite mysterious form in the arrangement of the rocks. It's only through form that we can realize emptiness." He showed me the picture of the boulders in well-raked sand, looking like islands in the sea, looking as though they had eyes (declivities) and surrounded by a neatly screened and architectural monastery patio. Then he showed me a diagram of the stone arrangement with the projection in silhouette and showed me the geometrical logics and all, and mentioned the phrases "lonely individuality" and the rocks as "bumps pushing into space," all meaning some kind of koan business I wasn't as much interested in as in him and especially in good kind Japhy who brewed more tea on his noisy gasoline primus and gave us added cups with almost a silent Oriental bow. It was quite different from the night of the poetry reading.

4
But the next night, about midnight, Coughlin and I and Alvah got together and decided to buy a big gallon jug of Burgundy and go bust in on Japhy in his shack.

"What's he doing tonight?" I asked.

"Oh," says Coughlin, "probably studying, probably screwing, we'll go see." We bought the jug on Shattuck Avenue way down and went over and once more I saw his pitiful English


 25

bicycle on the lawn. "Japhy travels around on that bicycle with his little knapsack on his back all up and down Berkeley all day," said Coughlin. "He used to do the same thing at Reed College in Oregon. He was a regular fixture up there. Then we'd throw big wine parties and have girls and end up jumping out of windows and playing Joe College pranks all up and down town."

"Gee, he's strange," said Alvah, biting his lip, in a mood of marvel, and Alvah himself was making a careful interested study of our strange noisy-quiet friend. We came in the little door again, Japhy looked up from his crosslegged study over a book, American poetry this time, glasses on, and said nothing but "Ah" in a strangely cultured tone. We took off our shoes and padded across the little five feet of straw to sit by him, but I was last with my shoes off, and had the jug in my hand, which I turned to show him from across the shack, and from his crosslegged position Japhy suddenly roared "Yaaaaah!" and leaped up into the air and straight across the room to me, landing on his feet in a fencing position with a sudden dagger in his hand the tip of it just barely stabbing the glass of the bottle with a small distinct "clink." It was the most amazing leap I ever saw in my life, except by nutty acrobats, much like a mountain goat, which he was, it turned out. Also it reminded me of a Japanese Samurai warriorthe yelling roar, the leap, the position, and his expression of comic wrath his eyes bulging and making a big funny face at me. I had the feeling it was really a complaint against our breaking in on his studies and against wine itself which would get him drunk and make him miss his planned evening of reading. But without further ado he uncapped the bottle himself and took a


26

big slug and we all sat crosslegged and spent four hours screaming news at one another, one of the funniest nights. Some of it went like this:

JAPHY: Well, Coughlin, you old fart, what you been doin?

COUGHLIN: Nothin.

ALVAH: What are all these strange books here? Hm, Pound, do you like Pound?

JAPHY: Except for the fact that that old fartface flubbed up the name of Li Po by calling him by his Japanese name and all such famous twaddle, he was all rightin fact he's my favorite poet.

RAY: Pound? Who wants to make a favorite poet out of that pretentious nut?

JAPHY: Have some more wine, Smith, you're not making sense. Who is your favorite poet, Alvah?

RAY: Why don't somebody ask me my favorite poet, I know more about poetry than all of you put together.

JAPHY: Is that true?

ALVAH: It might be. Haven't you seen Ray's new book of poems he just wrote in Mexico"the wheel of the quivering meat conception turns in the void expelling tics, porcupines, elephants, people, stardusts, fools, nonsense . . ."

RAY: That's not it!

JAPHY: Speaking of meat, have you read the new poem of ...

Etc., etc., then finally disintegrating into a wild talkfest and yellfest and finally songfest with people rolling on the floor in laughter and ending with Alvah and Coughlin and I going staggering up the quiet college street arm in arm singing "Eli Eli" at the top of our voices and dropping the empty jug right at our feet in a crash of glass, as Japhy laughed from


27

his little door. But we'd made him miss his evening of study and I felt bad about that, till the following night when he suddenly appeared at our little cottage with a pretty girl and came in and told her to take her clothes off, which she did at once.

5
This was in keeping with Japhy's theories about women and lovemaking. I forgot to mention that the day the rock artist had called on him in the late afternoon, a girl had come right after, a blonde in rubber boots and a Tibetan coat with wooden buttons, and in the general talk she'd inquired about our plan to climb Mount Matterhorn and said "Can I come with ya?" as she was a bit of a mountainclimber herself.

"Shore," said Japhy, in his funny voice he used for joking, a big loud deep imitation of a lumberjack he knew in the Northwest, a ranger actually, old Burnie Byers, "shore, come on with us and we'll all screw ya at ten thousand feet" and the way he said it was so funny and casual, and in fact serious, that the girl wasn't shocked at all but somewhat pleased. In this same spirit he'd now brought this girl Princess to our cottage, it was about eight o'clock at night, dark, Alvah and I were quietly sipping tea and reading poems or typing poems


28

at the typewriter and two bicycles came in the yard: Japhy on his, Princess on hers. Princess had gray eyes and yellow hair and was very beautiful and only twenty. I must say one thing about her, she was sex mad and man mad, so there wasn't much of a problem in persuading her to play yabyum. "Don't you know about yabyum, Smith?" said Japhy in his big booming voice striding in in his boots holding Princess's hand. "Princess and I come here to show ya, boy."

"Suits me," said I, "whatever it is." Also I'd known Princess before and had been mad about her, in the City, about a year ago. It was just another wild coincidence that she had happened to meet Japhy and fallen in love with him and madly too, she'd do anything he said. Whenever people dropped in to visit us at the cottage I'd always put my red bandana over the little wall lamp and put out the ceiling light to make a nice cool red dim scene to sit and drink wine and talk in. I did this, and went to get the bottle out of the kitchen and couldn't believe my eyes when I saw Japhy and Alvah taking their clothes off and throwing them every whichaway and I looked and Princess was stark naked, her skin white as snow when the red sun hits it at dusk, in the dim red light. "What the hell," I said.

"Here's what yabyum is, Smith," said Japhy, and he sat crosslegged on the pillow on the floor and motioned to Princess, who came over and sat down on him facing him with her arms about his neck and they sat like that saying nothing for a while. Japhy wasn't at all nervous and embarrassed and just sat there in perfect form just as he was supposed to do. "This is what they do in the temples of Tibet. It's a holy ceremony, it's done just like this in front of chanting priests. Peo-


 29

ple pray and recite Om Mani Pahdme Hum, which means Amen the Thunderbolt in the Dark Void. I'm the thunderbolt and Princess is the dark void, you see."

"But what's she thinking?" I yelled almost in despair, I'd had such idealistic longings for that girl in that past year and had conscience-stricken hours wondering if I should seduce her because she was so young and all.

"Oh this is lovely," said Princess. "Come on and try it."

"But I can't sit crosslegged like that." Japhy was sitting in the full lotus position, it's called, with both ankles over both thighs. Alvah was sitting on the mattress trying to yank his ankles over his thighs to do it. Finally Japhy's legs began to hurt and they just tumbled over on the mattress where both Alvah and Japhy began to explore the territory. I still couldn't believe it.

"Take your clothes off and join in, Smith!" But on top of all that, the feelings about Princess, I'd also gone through an entire year of celibacy based on my feeling that lust was the direct cause of birth which was the direct cause of suffering and death and I had really no lie come to a point where I regarded lust as offensive and even cruel.

"Pretty girls make graves," was my saying, whenever I'd had to turn my head around involuntarily to stare at the incomparable pretties of Indian Mexico. And the absence of active lust in me had also given me a new peaceful life that I was enjoying a great deal. But this was too much. I was still afraid to take my clothes off; also I never liked to do that in front of more than one person, especially with men around. But Japhy didn't give a goddamn hoot and holler about any of this and pretty soon he was making Princess happy and


   

then Alvah had a turn (with his big serious eyes staring in the dim light, and him reading poems a minute ago). So I said "How about me startin to work on her arm?"

"Go ahead, great." Which I did, lying down on the floor with all my clothes on and kissing her hand, then her wrist, then up, to her body, as she laughed and almost cried with delight everybody everywhere working on her. All the peaceful celibacy of my Buddhism was going down the drain. "Smith, I distrust any kind of Buddhism or any kinda philosophy or social system that puts down sex," said Japhy quite scholarly now that he was done and sitting naked crosslegged rolling himself a Bull Durham cigarette (which he did as part of his "simplicity" life). It ended up with everybody naked and finally making gay pots of coffee in the kitchen and Princess on the kitchen floor naked with her knees clasped in her arms, lying on her side, just for nothing, just to do it, then finally she and I took a warm bath together in the bathtub and could hear Alvah and Japhy discussing Zen Free Love Lunacy orgies in the other room.

"Hey Princess we'll do this every Thursday night, hey?" yelled Japhy. "It'll be a regular function."

"Yeah," yelled Princess from the bathtub. I'm telling you she was actually glad to do all this and told me "You know, I feel like I'm the mother of all things and I have to take care of my little children."

"You're such a young pretty thing yourself."

"But I'm the old mother of earth. I'm a Bodhisattva." She was just a little off her nut but when I heard her say "Bodhisattva" I realized she wanted to be a big Buddhist like Japhy and being a girl the only way she could express it was this


 31

way, which had its traditional roots in the yabyum ceremony of Tibetan Buddhism, so everything was fine.

Alvah was immensely pleased and was all for the idea of "every Thursday night" and so was I by now.

"Alvah, Princess says she's a Bodhisattva."

"Of course she is."

"She says she's the mother of all of us."

"The Bodhisattva women of Tibet and parts of ancient India," said Japhy, "were taken and used as holy concubines in temples and sometimes in ritual caves and would get to lay up a stock of merit and they meditated too. All of them, men and women, they'd meditate, fast, have balls like this, go back to eating, drinking, talking, hike around, live in viharas in the rainy season and outdoors in the dry, there was no question of what to do about sex which is what I always liked about Oriental religion. And what I always dug about the Indians in our country . . . You know when I was a little kid in Oregon I didn't feel that I was an American at all, with all that suburban ideal and sex repression and general dreary newspaper gray censorship of all our real human values but and when I discovered Buddhism and all I suddenly felt that I had lived in a previous lifetime innumerable ages ago and now because of faults and sins in that lifetime I was being degraded to a more grievous domain of existence and my karma was to be born in America where nobody has any fun or believes in anything, especially freedom. That's why I was always sympathetic to freedom movements, too, like anarchism in the Northwest, the oldtime heroes of Everett Massacre and all. . . ." It ended up with long earnest discussions about all these subjects and finally Princess got dressed and went


32

home with Japhy on their bicycles and Alvah and I sat facing each other in the dim red light.

"But you know, Ray, Japhy is really sharphe's really the wildest craziest sharpest cat we've ever met. And what I love about him is he's the big hero of the West Coast, do you realize I've been out here for two years now and hadn't met anybody worth knowing really or anybody with any truly illuminated intelligence and was giving up hope for the West Coast? Besides all the background he has, in Oriental scholarship, Pound, taking peyote and seeing visions, his mountainclimbing and bhikkuing, wow, Japhy Ryder is a great new hero of American culture."

"He's mad!" I agreed. "And other things I like about him, his quiet sad moments when he don't say much. . . ."

"Gee, I wonder what will happen to him in the end."

"I think he'll end up like Han Shan living alone in the mountains and writing poems on the walls of cliffs, or chanting them to crowds outside his cave."

"Or maybe he'll go to Hollywood and be a movie star, you know he said that the other day, he said 'Alvah you know I've never thought of going to the movies and becoming a star, I can do anything you know, I haven't tried that yet,' and I believe him, he can do anything. Did you see the way he had Princess all wrapped around Mm?"

"Aye indeed" and later that night as Alvah slept I sat under the tree in the yard and looked up at the stars or closed my eyes to meditate and tried to quiet myself down back to my normal self.

Alvah couldn't sleep and came out and lay flat on his back in the grass looking up at the sky, and said "Big steamy clouds


33

going by in the dark up there, it makes me realize we live on an actual planet."

"Close your eyes and you'll see more than that."

"Oh I don't know what you mean by all that!" he said pettishly. He was always being bugged by my little lectures on Samadhi ecstasy, which is the state you reach when you stop everything and stop your mind and you actually with your eyes closed see a kind of eternal multiswarm of electrical Power of some kind ululating in place of just pitiful images and forms of objects, which are, after all, imaginary. And if you don't believe me come back in a billion years and deny it. For what is time? "Don't you think it's much more interesting just to be like Japhy and have girls and studies and good times and really be doing something, than all this silly sitting under trees?"

"Nope," I said, and meant it, and I knew Japhy would agree with me. "All Japhy's doing is amusing himself in the void."

"I don't think so."

 "I bet he is. I'm going mountainclimbing with him next week and find out and tell you."

"Well" (sigh), "as for me, I'm just going to go on being Alvah Goldbook and to hell with all this Buddhist bullshit."

"You'll be sorry some day. Why don't you ever understand what I'm trying to tell you: it's with your six senses that you're fooled into believing not only that you have six senses, but that you contact an actual outside world with them. If it  wasn't for your eyes, you wouldn't see me. If it wasn't for  your ears, you wouldn't hear that airplane. If it wasn't for  your nose, you wouldn't smell the midnight mint. If it wasn't  for your tongue taster, you wouldn't taste the difference be-


34 

tween A and B. If it wasn't for your body, you wouldn't feel Princess. There is no me, no airplane, no mind, no Princess, no nothing, you for krissakes do you want to go on being fooled every damn minute of your life?"

"Yes, that's all I want, I thank God that something has come out of nothing."

"Well, I got news for you, it's the other way around nothing has come out of something, and that something is Dhar-makaya, the body of the True Meaning, and that nothing is this and all this twaddle and talk. I'm going to bed."

"Well sometimes I see a flash of illumination in what you're trying to say but believe me I get more of a satori out of Princess than out of words."

"It's a satori of your foolish flesh, you lecher."

"I know my redeemer liveth."

"What redeemer and what liveth?"

"Oh let's cut this out and just live!"

"Balls, when I thought like you, Alvah, I was just as miserable and graspy as you are now. All you want to do is run out there and get laid and get beat up and get screwed up and get old and sick and banged around by samsara, you fucking eternal meat of comeback you you'll deserve it too, I'll say."

"That's not nice. Everybody's tearful and trying to live with what they got. Your Buddhism has made you mean Ray and makes you even afraid to take your clothes off for a simple healthy orgy."

"Well, I did finally, didn't I?"

"But you were coming on so ninety about Oh let's forget it."

Alvah went to bed and I sat and closed my eyes and thought "This thinking has stopped" but because I had to think it no


35

thinking had stopped, but there did come over me a wave of gladness to know that all this perturbation was just a dream already ended and I didn't have to worry because I wasn't "I" and I prayed that God, or Tathagata, would give me enough time and enough sense and strength to be able to tell people what I knew (as I can't even do properly now) so they'd know what I know and not despair so much. The old tree brooded over me silently, a living thing. I heard a mouse snoring in the garden weeds. The rooftops of Berkeley looked like pitiful living meat sheltering grieving phantoms from the eternality of the heavens which they feared to face. By the time I went to bed I wasn't taken in by no Princess or no desire for no Princess and nobody's disapproval and I felt glad and slept well.

6
Now came the time for our big mountain climb. Japhy came over in late afternoon on his bike to get me. We took out Alvah's knapsack and put it in his bike basket. I took out socks and sweaters. But I had no climbing shoes and the only things that could serve were Japhy's tennis sneakers, old but firm. My own shoes were too floppy and torn. "That might be better, Ray, with sneakers your feet are light and you can jump from boulder to boulder with no trouble. Of course we'll swap shoes at certain times and make it."


36

"What about food? What are you bringing?" "Well before I tell you about food, R-a-a-y" (sometimes he called me by my first name and always when he did so, it was a long-drawn-out sad "R-a-a-a-y" as though he was worried about my welfare), "I've got your sleeping bag, it's not a duck down like my own, and naturally a lot heavier, but with clothes on and a good big fire you'll be comfortable up there."

"Clothes on yeah, but why a big fire, it's only October." "Yeah but it's below freezing up there, R-a-a-y, in October," he said sadly. "At night?"

"Yeah at night and in the daytime it's real warm and pleasant. You know old John Muir used to go up to those mountains where we're going with nothing but his old Army coat and a paper bag full of dried bread and he slept in his coat and just soaked the old bread in water when he wanted to eat, and he roamed around like that for months before tramping back to the city."

"My goodness he musta been tough!"

"Now as for food, I went down to Market Street to the Crystal Palace market and bought my favorite dry cereal, bulgur, which is a kind of a Bulgarian cracked rough wheat and I'm going to stick pieces of bacon in it, little square chunks, that'll make a fine supper for all three of us, Morley and us. And I'm bringing tea, you always want a good cup of hot tea under those cold stars. And I'm bringing real chocolate pudding, not that instant phony stuff but good chocolate pudding that I'll bring to a boil and stir over the fire and then let it cool ice cold in the snow." "Oh boy!"


37

"So insteada rice this time, which I usually bring, 1 thought I'd make a nice delicacy for you, R-a-a-y, and in the bulgur too I'm going to throw in all kinds of dried diced vegetables I bought at the Ski Shop. We'll have our supper and breakfast outa this, and for energy food this big bag of peanuts and raisins and another bag with dried apricot and dried prunes oughta fix us for the rest." And he showed me the very tiny bag in which all this important food for three grown men for twenty-four hours or more climbing at high altitudes was stored. "The main thing in going to mountains is to keep the weight as far down as possible, those packs get heavy."

"But my God there's not enough food in that little bag!"

"Yes there is, the water swells it up."

"Do we bring wine?"

"No it isn't any good up there and once you're at high altitude and tired you don't crave alcohol." I didn't believe this but said nothing. We put my own things on the bike and walked across the campus to his place pushing the bike along the edge of the sidewalk. It was a cool clear Arabian Night dusk with the tower clock of University of Cal a clean black shadow against a backdrop of cypress and eucalyptus and all kinds of trees, bells ringing somewhere, and the air crisp. "It's going to be cold up there," said Japhy, but he was feeling fine that night and laughed when I asked him about next Thursday with Princess. "You know we played yabyum twice more since that last night, she comes over to my shack any day or night any minute and man she won't take no for an answer. So I satisfy the Bodhisattva." And Japhy wanted to talk about everything, his boyhood in Oregon. "You know my mother and father and sister were living a real primitive


38

life on that logcabin farm and on cold winter mornings we'd all undress and dress in front of the fire, we had to, that's why I'm not like you about undressing, I mean I'm not bashful or anything like that."

"What'd you use to do around college?"

"In the summers I was always a government fire lookout that's what you oughta do next summer, Smithand in the winters I did a lot of skiing and used to walk .around the campus on crutches real proud. I climbed some pretty big mountains up there, including a long haul up Rainier almost to the top where you sign your name. I finally made it one year. There are only a few names up there, you know. And I climbed all around the Cascades, off season and in season, and worked as a logger. Smith, I gotta tell you all about the romance of Northwest logging, like you keep talking about railroading, you shoulda seen the little narrow-gauge railways up there and those cold winter mornings with snow and your belly fulla pancakes and syrup and black coffee, boy, and you raise your doublebitted ax to your morning's first log there's nothing like it."

"That's just like my dream of the Great Northwest. The Kwakiutl Indians, the Northwest Mounted Police. . . ."

"Well, there in Canada they got them, over in British Columbia, I used to meet some on the trail." We pushed the bike down past the various college hangouts and cafeterias and looked into Robbie's to see if we knew anybody. Alvah was in there, working his part-time job as busboy. Japhy and I were kind of outlandish-looking on the campus in our old clothes in fact Japhy was considered an eccentric around the campus, which is the usual thing for campuses and college people to think whenever a real man appears on the scene


 39

colleges being nothing but grooming schools for the middle-class non-identity which usually finds its perfect expression on the outskirts of the campus in rows of well-to-do houses with lawns and television sets in each living room with everybody looking at the same thing and thinking the same thing at the same time while the Japhies of the world go prowling in the wilderness to hear the voice crying in the wilderness, to find the ecstasy of the stars, to find the dark mysterious secret of the origin of faceless wonderless crapulous civilization. "All these people," said Japhy, "they all got white-tiled toilets and take big dirty craps like bears in the mountains, but it's all washed away to convenient supervised sewers and nobody thinks of crap any more or realizes that their origin is shit and civet and scum of the sea. They spend all day washing their hands with creamy soaps they secretly wanta eat in the bathroom." He had a million ideas, he had 'em all.

We got to his little shack as it grew dark and you could smell woodsmoke and smoke of leaves in the air, and packed everything up neat and went down the street to meet Henry Morley who had the car. Henry Morley was a bespectacled fellow of great learning but an eccentric himself, more eccentric and outre than Japhy on the campus, a librarian, with few friends, but a mountainclimber. His own little one-room cottage in a back lawn of Berkeley was filled with

books and pictures of mountainclimbing and scattered all over with rucksacks, climbing boots, skis. I was amazed to hear him talk, he talked exactly like Rheinhold Cacoethes the critic, it turned out they'd been friends long ago and climbed mountains together and I couldn't tell whether Morley had influenced Cacoethes or the other way around.


40 

I felt it was Morley who had done the influencinghe had the same snide, sarcastic, extremely witty, well-formulated speech, with thousands of images, like, when Japhy and I walked in and there was a gathering of Morley's friends in there (a strange outlandish group including one Chinese and one German from Germany and several other students of some kind) Morley said "I'm bringing my air mattress, you guys can sleep on that hard cold ground if you want but I'm going to have pneumatic aid besides I went and spend sixteen dollars on it in the wilderness of Oakland Army Navy stores and drove around all day wondering if with rollerskates or suction cups you can technically call yourself a vehicle" or some such to-me-incomprehensible (to everybody else) secret-meaning joke of his own, to which nobody listened much anyway, he kept talking and talking as though to himself but I liked him right away. We sighed when we saw the huge amounts of junk he wanted to take on the climb: even canned goods, and besides his rubber air mattress a whole lot of pickax and whatnot equipment we'd really never need.

"You can carry that ax, Morley, but I don't think we'll need it, but canned goods is just a lot of water you have to hig on your back, don't you realize we got all the water we want waitin for us up there?"

"Well I just thought a can of this Chinese chop suey would be kinda tasty."

"I've got enough food for all of us. Let's go."

Morley spent a long time talking and fishing around and getting together his unwieldy packboard and finally we said goodbye to his friends and got into Morley's little English car and started off, about ten o'clock, toward Tracy and up to


41

Bridgeport from where we would drive another eight miles to the foot of the trail at the lake.

I sat in the back seat and they talked up front. Morley was an actual madman who would come and get me (later) carrying a quart of eggnog expecting me to drink that, but I'd make him drive me to a liquor store, and the whole idea was to go out and see some girl and he'd have me come along to act as pacifier of some kind: we came to her door, she Opened it, when she saw who it was she slammed the door and we drove back to the cottage. "Well what was this?" "Well it's a long story," Morley would say vaguely, I never quite understood what he was up to. Also, seeing Alvah had no spring bed in the cottage, one day he appeared like a ghost in a doorway as we were innocently getting up and brewing coffee and presented us with a huge double-bed spring that, after he left, we struggled to hide in the barn. And he'd bring odd assorted boards and whatnot, and impossible bookshelves, all kinds of things, and years later I had further Three Stooges adventures with him going out to his house in Contra Costa (which he owned and rented) and spending impossible-to-believe afternoons when he paid me two dollars an hour for hauling out bucket after bucket of mudslime which he himself was doling out of a flooded cellar by hand, black and mudcovered as Tartarilouak the King of the Mudslimes of Paratioalaouakak Span, with a secret grin of elfish delight on his face; and later, returning through some little town and Wanting ice-cream cones, we walked down Main Street (had hiked on the highway with buckets and rakes) with ice-cream cones in our hands knocking into people on the little sidewalks like a couple of oldtime Hollywood silent film comedians, whitewash and all. An extremely strange person any-


42

way, in any case, any old way you looked at, and drove the car now out toward Tracy on the busy fourlaner highway and did most of the talking, at everything Japhy said he had twelve to say, and it went like this: Japhy would say something like "By God I feel real studious lately, I think I'll read some ornithology next week." Morley would say, "Who doesn't feel studious when he doesn't have a girl with a Riviera suntan?"

Every time he said something he would turn and look at Japhy and deliver these rather brilliant inanities with a complete deadpan; I couldn't understand what kind of strange secret scholarly linguistic clown he really was under these California skies. Or Japhy would mention sleeping bags, and Morley would ramble in with "I'm going to be the possessor of a pale blue French sleeping bag, light weight, goose down, good buy I think, find 'em in Vancouvergood for Daisy Mae. Completely wrong type for Canada. Everyone wants to know if her grandfather was an explorer who met an Eskimo. I'm from the North Pole myself."

"What's he talking about?" I'd ask from the back seat, and Japhy: "He's just an interesting tape recorder."

I'd told the boys I had a touch of thrombophlebitis, blood clots in the veins in my feet, and was afraid about tomorrow's climb, not that it would hobble me but would get worse when we came down. Morley said "Is thrombophlebitis a peculiar rhythm for piss?" Or I'd say something about Westerners and he'd say, "I'm a dumb Westerner . . . look what preconceptions have done to England."

"You're crazy, Morley."

"I dunno, maybe I am, but if I am I'll leave a lovely will anyway." Then out of nowhere he would say "Well I'm very


 43

pleased to go climbing with two poets, I'm going to write a book myself, it'll be about Ragusa, a late medieval maritime city state republic which solved the class problem, offered the secretaryship to Machiavelli and for a generation had its language used as the diplomatic one for the Levant. This was because of pull with the Turks, of course."

"Of course," we'd say.

So he'd ask himself the question out loud: "Can you secure Christmas with an approximation only eighteen million seconds left of the original old red chimney?"

"Sure," says Japhy laughing.

"Sure," says Morley wheeling the car around increasing curves, "they're boarding reindeer Greyhound specials for a pre-season heart-to-heart Happiness Conference deep in Sierra wilderness ten thousand five hundred and sixty yards from a primitive motel. It's newer than analysis and deceptively simple. If you lost the roundtrip ticket you can become a gnome, the outfits are cute and there's a rumor that Actors Equity conventions sop up the overflow bounced from the Legion. Either way, of course, Smith" (turning to me in the back) "and in finding your way back to the emotional wilderness you're bound to get a present from . . . someone. Will some maple syrup help you feel better?"

"Sure, Henry."

And that was Morley. Meanwhile the car began climbing into the foothills somewhere and we came to sundry sullen towns where we stopped for gas and nothing but bluejeaned Elvis Presleys in the road, waiting to beat somebody up, but down beyond them the roar of fresh creeks and the feel of the high mountains not far away. A pure sweet night, and finally we got out on a real narrow tar country road and


44

headed up toward the mountains for sure. Tall pine trees began to appear at the side of the road and occasional rock cliffs. The air felt nippy and grand. This also happened to be the opening eve of the hunting season and in a bar where we stopped for a drink there were many hunters in red caps and wool shirts looking silly getting loaded, with all their guns and shells in their cars and eagerly asking us if we'd seen any deer or not. We had, certainly, seen a deer, just before we came to the bar. Morley had been driving and talking, saying, "Well Ryder maybe you'll be Alfred Lord Tennyson of our little tennis party here on the Coast, they'll call you the New Bohemian and compare you to the Knights of the Round Table minus Amadis the Great and the extraordinary splendors of the little Moorish kingdom that was sold round to Ethiopia for seventeen thousand camels and sixteen hundred foot soldiers when Caesar was sucking on his mammy's teat," and suddenly the deer was in the road, looking at our headlamps, petrified, before leaping into the shrubbery by the side of the road and disappearing into the sudden vast diamond silence of the forest  (which we heard as Morley cut the motor) and just the scuffle of its hoofs running off to the haven of the raw fish Indian up there in the mists. It was real country we were in, Morley said about three thousand feet now. We could hear creeks rushing coldly below on cold starlit rocks without seeing them. "Hey little deer," I'd yelled to the animal, "don't worry, we won't shoot you." Now in the bar, where we'd stopped at my insistence ("In this kinda cold northern upmountain country ain't nothin better for a man's soul at midnight but a good warm glass of warmin red port heavy as the syrups of Sir Arthur")


 45

"Okay Smith," said Japhy, "but seems to me we shouldn't drink on a hiking trip."

"Ah who gives a damn?"

"Okay, but look at all the money we saved by buying cheap dried foods for this weekend and all you're gonna do is drink it right down."

"That's the story of my life rich or poor and mostly poor and truly poor." We went in the bar, which was a roadhouse ill done up in the upcountry mountain style, like a Swiss chalet, with moose heads and designs of deer on the booths and the people in the bar itself an advertisement for the hunting season but all of them loaded, a weaving mass of shadows at the dim bar as we walked in and sat at three stools and ordered the port. The port was a strange request in the whisky country of hunters but the bartender rousted up an odd bottle of Christian Brothers port and poured us two shots in wide wineglasses (Morley a teetotaler actually) and Japhy and I drank and felt it fine.

 "Ah," said Japhy warming up to his wine and midnight, "soon I'm going back north to visit my childhood wet woods and cloudy mountains and old bitter intellectual friends and old drunken logger friends, by God, Ray you ain't lived till you been up there with me, or without. And then I'm going to Japan and walk all over that hilly country finding ancient little temples hidden and forgotten in the mountains and old Sages a hundred and nine years old praying to Kwannon in huts and meditating so much that when they come out of meditation they laugh at everything that moves. But that don't mean I don't love America, by God, though I hate these damn hunters, all they wanta do is level a gun at a helpless sentient


46

being and murder it, for every sentient being or living creature these actual pricks kill they will be reborn a thousand times to suffer the horrors of samsara and damn good for 'em too."

"Hear that, Morley, Henry, what you think?"

"My Buddhism is nothing but a mild unhappy interest in some of the pictures they've drawn though I must say sometimes Cacoethes strikes a nutty note of Buddhism in his mountainclimbing poems though I'm not much interested in the belief part of it." In fact it didn't make a goddamn much of a difference to him. "I'm neutral," said he, laughing happily with a kind of an eager slaking leer, and Japhy yelled:

"Neutral is what Buddhism is!"

"Well, that port'll make you have to swear off yogurt. You know I am a fortiori disappointed because there's no Benedictine or Trappist wine, only Christian Brothers holy waters and spirits around here. Not that I feel very expansive about being here in this curious bar anyway, it looks like the home-plate for Ciardi and Bread Loaf writers, Armenian grocers all of 'em, well-meaning awkward Protestants who are on a group excursion for a binge and want to but don't understand how to insert the contraception. These people must be assholes," he added in a sudden straight revelation. "The milk around here must be fine but more cows than people. This must be a different race of Anglos up here, I don't particularly warm up to their appearance. The fast kids around here must go thirty-four miles. Well, Japhy," said he, concluding, "if you ever get an official job I hope you get a Brooks Brothers suit . . . hope you don't wind up in artsfartsy parties where it would Say," as some girls walked in, "young hunters . . . must be why the baby wards are open all year."


  47

But the hunters didn't like us to be huddled there talking close and friendly in low voices about sundry personal topics and joined us and pretty soon it was a long funny harangue up and down the oval bar about deer in the locality, where to go climb, what do do, and when they heard we were out in this country not to kill animals but just to climb mountains they took us to be hopeless eccentrics and left as alone. Japhy and I had two wines and felt fine and went back in the car with Morley and we drove away, higher and higher, the trees taller, the air colder, climbing, till finally it was almost two o'clock in the morning and they said we had a long way to go yet to Bridgeport and the foot of the trail so we might as well sleep out in these woods in our sleeping bags and call it a day.

 "We'll get up at dawn and take off. Meanwhile we have this good brown bread and cheese too," said Japhy producing it, brown bread and cheese he'd thrown in at the last minute in his little shack, "and that'll make a fine breakfast and we'll save the bulgur and goodies for our breakfast tomorrow morning at ten thousand feet." Fine. Still talking and all, Morley drove the car a little way over some hard pine needles under an immense spread of natural park trees, firs and ponde-rosas a hundred feet high some of them, a great quiet starlit grove with frost on the ground and dead silence except for occasional little ticks of sound in the thickets where maybe a rabbit stood petrified hearing us. I got out my sleeping bag and spread it out and took off my shoes and just as I was sighing happily and slipping my stockinged feet into my sleeping bag and looking around gladly at the beautiful tall trees thinking "Ah what a night of true sweet sleep this will be, what meditations I can get into in this intense silence


48

of Nowhere" Japhy yelled at me from the car: "Say, it appears Mr. Morley has forgotten his sleeping bag!"

"What . . . well now what?"

They discussed it awhile fiddling with flashlights in the frost and then Japhy came over and said "You'll have to crawl outa there Smith, all we have is two sleeping bags now and gotta zip 'em open and spread 'em out to form a blanket for three, goddammit that'll be cold."

"What? And the cold'll slip in around the bottoms!"

"Well Henry can't sleep in that car, he'll freeze to death, no heater."

"But goddammit I was all ready to enjoy this so much," I whined getting out and putting on my shoes and pretty soon Japhy had fixed the two sleeping bags on top of ponchos and was already settled down to sleep and on toss it was me had to sleep in the middle, and it was way below freezing by now, and the stars were icicles of mockery. I got in and lay down and Morley, I could hear the maniac blowing up his ridiculous air mattress so he could lay beside me, but the moment he'd done so, he started at once to turn over and heave and sigh, and around the other side, and back toward me, and around the other side, all under the ice-cold stars and loveliness, while Japhy snored, Japhy who wasn't subjected to all the mad wiggling. Finally Morley couldn't sleep at all and got up and went to the car probably to talk to himself in that mad way of his and I got a wink of sleep, but in a few minutes he was back, freezing, and got under the sleeping-bag blanket but started to turn and turn again, even curse once in a while, or sigh, and this went on for what seemed to be eternities and the first thing I knew Aurora was paling the eastern hems of Amida and pretty soon we'd be getting up


 49

anyway. That mad Morley! And this was only the beginning of the misadventures of that most remarkable man (as you'll see now), that remarkable man who was probably the only mountainclimber in the history of the world who forgot to bring his sleeping bag. "Jesus," I thought, "why didn't he just forget his dreary air mattress instead."

7
From the very first moment we'd "met Morley he'd kept emitting sudden yodels in keeping with our venture. TMs was a simple "Yodelayhee" but it came at the oddest moments and in oddest circumstances, like several times when his CMnese and German friends were still around, then later in the car, sitting with us enclosed, "Yodelayhee!" and then as we got out of the car to go in the bar, "Yodelayhee!" Now as Japhy woke up and saw it was dawn and jumped out of the bags and ran to gather firewood and shudder over a little preliminary fire, Morley woke up from his nervous small sleep of dawn, yawned, and yelled "Yodelayhee!" which echoed toward vales in the distance. I got up too; it Was all we could do to hold together; the only thing to do was hop around and flap your arms, like me and my sad bum on the gon on the south coast. But soon Japhy got more logs on the fire and it was a roaring bonfire that we turned our backs to after a while and yelled and talked. A


5  

beautiful morningred pristine shafts of sunlight coming in over the hill and slanting down into the cold trees like cathedral light, and the mists rising to meet the sun, and all the way around the giant secret roar of tumbling creeks probably with films of ice in the pools. Great fishing country. Pretty soon I was yelling "Yodelayhee" myself but when Japhy went to fetch more wood and we couldn't see him for a while and Morley yelled "Yodelayhee" Japhy answered back with a simple "Hoo" which he said was the Indian way to call in the mountains and much nicer. So I began to yell "Hoo" myself.

Then we got in the car and started off. We ate the bread and cheese. No difference between the Morley of this morning and the Morley of last night, except his voice as he rattled on yakking in that cultured snide funny way of his was sorta cute with that morning freshness, like the way people's voices sound after getting up early in the morning, something faintly wistful and hoarse and eager in it, ready for a new day. Soon the sun was warm. The black bread was good, it had been baked by Sean Monahan's wife, Sean who had a shack in Corte Madera we could all go live in free of rent some day. The cheese was sharp Cheddar. But it didn't satisfy me much and when we got out into country with no more houses and anything I began to yearn for a good old hot breakfast and suddenly after we'd gone over a little creek bridge we saw a merry little lodge by the side of the road under tremendous juniper trees with smoke boiling out of the chimney and neon signs outside and a sign in the window advertising pancakes and hot coffee.

"Let's go in there, by God we need a man's breakfast if we're gonna climb all day."


51

Nobody complained about my idea and we went in, and sat at booths, and a nice woman took our orders with that cheery loquaciousness of people in the backcountry. "Well you boys goin huntin this mornin?"

"No'm," said Japhy, "just climbing Matterhorn."

"Matterhorn, why I wouldn't do that if somebody paid me a thousand dollars!"

Meanwhile I went out to the log Johns out back and washed from water in the tap which was delightfully cold and made my face tingle, then I drank some of it and it was like cool liquid ice in my stomach and sat there real nice, and I had more. Shaggy dogs were barking in the golden red sunlight slanting down from the hundred-foot branches of the firs and ponderosas. I could see snowcapped mountains glittering in the distance. One of them was Matterhorn. I went in and the pancakes were ready, hot and steaming, and poured syrup over my three pats of butter and cut them up and slurped hot coffee and ate. So did Henry and Japhyfor once no conversation. Then we washed it all down with that incomparable cold water as hunters came in in hunting boots with wool shirts but no giddy drunk hunters but serious hunters ready to go out there after breakfast. There was a bar adjoining but nobody cared about alcohol this morning.

We got in the car, crossed another creek bridge, crossed a meadow with a few cows and log cabins, and came out on a plain which clearly showed Matterhorn rising the highest most awful looking of the jagged peaks to the south. "There she is," said Morley really proud. "Isn't it beautiful, doesn't it remind you of the Alps? I've got a collection of snow covered mountain photos you should see sometime."

"I like the real thing meself," said Japhy, looking seriously


52

at the mountains and in that far-off look in his eyes, that secret self-sigh, I saw he was back home again. Bridgeport is a little sleepy town, curiously New England-like, on that plain. Two restaurants, two gas stations, a school, all sidewalking Highway 395 as it comes through there running from down Bishop way up to Carson City Nevada.

8
Now another incredible delay was caused as Mr. Morley decided to see if he could find a store open in Bridgeport and buy a sleeping bag or at least a canvas cover or tarpaulin of some kind for tonight's sleep at nine thousand feet and judging from last night's sleep at four thousand it was bound to be pretty cold. Meanwhile Japhy and I waited, sitting in the now hot sun of ten a.m. on the grass of the school, watching occasional laconic traffic pass by on the not-busy highway and watching to see the fortunes of a young Indian hitchhiker pointed north. We discussed him warmly. "That's what I like, hitchhiking around, feeling free, imagine though being an Indian and doing all that. Dammit Smith, let's go talk to him and wish him luck." The Indian wasn't very talkative but not unfriendly and told us he'd been making pretty slow time on 395. We wished him luck. Meanwhile in the very tiny town Morley was nowhere to be seen.


53

"What's he doing, waking up some proprietor in his bed back there?"

Finally Morley came back and said there was nothing available and the only thing to do was to borrow a couple of blankets at the lake lodge. We got in the car, went back down the highway a few hundred yards, and turned south toward the glittering trackless snows high in the blue air. We drove along beautiful Twin Lakes and came to the lake lodge, which was a big white framehouse inn, Morley went in and deposited five dollars for the use of two blankets for one night. A woman was standing in the doorway arms akimbo, dogs barked. The road was dusty, a dirt road, but the lake was cerulean pure. In it the reflections of the cliffs and foothills showed perfectly. But the road was being repaired and we could see yellow dust boiling up ahead where we'd have to walk along the lake road awhile before cutting across a creek at the end of the lake and up through underbrush and up the beginning of the trail.

We parked the car and got all our gear out and arranged it in the warm sun. Japhy put things in my knapsack and told me I had to carry it or jump in the lake. He was being very serious and leaderly and it pleased me more than anything else. Then with the same boyish gravity he went over to the dust of the road with the pickax and drew a big circle and began drawing things in the circle.

"What's that?"

"I'm doin a magic mandala that'll not only help us on our climb but after a few more marks and chants I'll be able to predict the future from it."

"What's a mandala?"


54

"They're the Buddhist designs that are always circles filled with things, the circle representing the void and the things illusion, see. You sometimes see mandalas painted over a Bodhisattva's head and can tell his history from studying it. Tibetan in origin."

I had on the tennis sneakers and now I whipped out my mountainclimbing' cap  for the  day,  which  Japhy  had  consigned to me, which was a little black French beret, which I put on at a jaunty angle and hitched the knapsack up and I was ready to go. In the sneakers and the beret I felt more like a Bohemian painter than a mountainclimber. But Japhy had on his fine big boots and his little green Swiss cap with feather, and looked elfin but rugged. I see the picture of him alone in the mountains in that outfit: the vision: it's pure morning in the high dry Sierras, far off clean firs can be seen shadowing the sides of rocky hills, further yet snowcapped pinpoints, nearer the big bushy forms of pines and there's Japhy in his little cap with a big rucksack on his back, clomping along, but with a flower in his left hand which is hooked to the strap of the rucksack at his breast; grass  grows  out between crowded rocks and boulders; distant sweeps of scree can be seen making gashes down the sides of morning, his eyes shine with joy, he's on his way, his heroes are John Muir and Han Shan and Shih-te and Li Po and John Burroughs and Paul Bunyan and Kropotkin; he's small and has a funny kind of belly coming out as he strides, but it's not because his belly is big, it's because his spine curves a bit, but that's offset by the vigorous long steps he takes, actually the long steps of a tall man (as I found out following him uptrail) and his chest is deep and shoulders broad. "Goldangit Japhy I feel great this morning," I said as we


 55

locked the car and all three of us started swinging down the lake road with our packs, straggling a bit occupying side and center and other side of the road like straggling infantrymen. "Isn't this a hell of a lot greater than The Place? Gettin drunk in there on a fresh Saturday morning like this, all bleary and sick, and here we are by the fresh pure lake walkin along in this good air, by God it's a haiku in itself."

"Comparisons are odious, Smith," he sent sailing back to me, quoting Cervantes and making a Zen Buddhist observation to boot. "It don't make a damn frigging difference whether you're in The Place or hiking up Matterhorn, it's all the same old void, boy." And I mused about that and realized he was right, comparisons are odious, it's all the same, but it sure felt great and suddenly I realized this (in spite of my swollen foot veins) would do me a lot of good and get me away from drinking and maybe make me appreciate perhaps a whole new way of living.

"Japhy I'm glad I met you. I'm gonna learn all about how to pack rucksacks and what to do and hide in these mountains when I'm sick of civilization. In fact I'm grateful I met you."

"Well Smith I'm grateful I met you too, learnin about how to write spontaneously and all that."

"Ah that's nothing."

"To me it's a lot. Let's go boys, a little faster, we ain't got no time to waste."

By and by we reached the boiling yellow dust where caterpillars were churning around and great big fat sweaty operators who didn't even look at us were swearing and cussing on the job. For them to climb a mountain you'd have to pay them double time and quadruple time today, Saturday.

Japhy and I laughed to think of it. I felt a little embarrassed


56 

with my silly beret but the cat operators didn't even look and soon we left them behind and were approaching the final little store lodge at the foot of the trail. It was a log cabin, set right on the end of the lake, and it was enclosed in a V of pretty big foothills. Here we stopped and rested awhile on the steps, we'd hiked approximately four miles but on flat good road, and went in and bought candy and crackers and Cokes and stuff. Then suddenly Morley, who'd not been silent on the four-mile hike, and looked funny in his own outfit which was that immense packboard with air mattress and all (deflated now) and no hat at all, so that he looked just like he does in the library, but with big floppy pants of some kind, Morley suddenly remembered he'd forgotten to drain the crankcase.

"So he forgot to drain the crankcase," I said noticing their consternation and not knowing much about cars, "so he forgot to brain the drankbase."

"No, this means that if it gets below freezing tonight down here the goddamn radiator explodes and we can't drive back home and have to walk twelve miles to Bridgeport and all and get all hung-up."

"Well maybe it won't be so cold tonight."

"Can't take a chance," said Morley and by that time I was pretty mad at him for finding more ways than he could figure to forget, foul up, disturb, delay, and make go round in circles this relatively simple hiking trip we'd undertaken.

"What you gonna do? What we gonna do, walk back four miles?"

"Only thing to do, I'll walk back alone, drain the crankcase, walk back and follow you up the trail and meet you tonight at the camp."


57

"And I'll light a big bonfire," said Japhy, "and you'll see the glow and just yodel and we'll direct you in."

"That's simple."

"But you've got to step on it to make it by nightfall at camp."

"I will, I'll start back right now."

But then I felt sorry about poor old hapless funny Henry and said "Ah hell, you mean you're not going to climb with us today, the hell with the crankcase come on with us."

"It'd cost too much money if that thing froze tonight, Smith no I think I better go back. I've got plenty of nice thoughts to keep me acquainted with probably what you two'll be talking about all day, aw hell I'll just start back right now. Be sure not to roar at bees and don't hurt the cur and if the tennis party comes on with everybody shirtless don't make eyes at the searchlight or the sun'll kick a girl's ass right back at you, cats and all and boxes of fruit and oranges thrown in" and some such statement and with no ado or ceremony there he went down the road with just a little handwave, muttering and talking on to himself, so we had to yell "Well so long Henry, hurry up" and he didn't answer but just walked off shrugging.

"You know," I said, "I think it doesn't make any difference to him anyway. He's just satisfied to wander around and forget things."

"And pat his belly and look at things as they are, sorta like in Chuangtse" and Japhy and I had a good laugh watching forlorn Henry swaggering down all that road we'd only just negotiated, alone and mad.

"Well here we go" said Japhy. "When I get tired of this big rucksack we'll swap."


58

"I'm ready now. Man, come on, give it to me now, I feel like carrying something heavy. You don't realize how good I feel, man, come on!" So we swapped packs and started off.

Both of us were feeling fine and were talking a blue streak, about anything, literature, the mountains, girls, Princess, the poets, Japan, our past adventures in life, and I suddenly realized it was a kind of blessing in disguise Morley had forgotten to drain the crankcase, otherwise Japhy wouldn't have got in a word edgewise all the blessed day and now I had a chance to hear his ideas. In the way he did things, hiking, he reminded me of Mike my boyhood chum who also loved to lead the way, real grave like Buck Jones, eyes to the distant horizons, like Natty Bumppo, cautioning me about snapping twigs or "It's too deep here, let's go down the creek a ways to ford it," or "There'll be mud in that low bottom, we better skirt around" and dead serious and glad. I saw all Japhy's boyhood in those eastern Oregon forests the way he went about it. He walked like he talked, from behind I could see his toes pointed slightly inward, the way mine do, instead of out; but when it came time to climb he pointed his toes out, like Chaplin, to make a kind of easier flapthwap as he trudged. We went across a kind of muddy riverbottom through dense undergrowth and a few willow trees and came out on the other side a little wet and started up the trail, which was clearly marked and named and had been recently repaired by trail crews but as we hit parts where a rock had rolled on the trail he took great precaution to throw the rock off saying "I used to work on trail crews, I can't see a trail all mettlesome like that, Smith." As we climbed the lake began to appear below us and suddenly in its clear blue pool we could see the deep holes where


 59

the lake had its springs, like black wells, and we could see schools of fish skitter.

"Oh this is like an early morning in China and I'm five years old in beginningless time!" I sang out and felt like sitting by the trail and whipping out my little notebook and writing sketches about it.

"Look over there," sang Japhy, "yellow aspens. Just put me in the mind of a haiku . . . 'Talking about the literary life the yellow aspens.' " Walking in this country you could understand the perfect gems of haikus the Oriental poets had written, never getting drunk in the mountains or anything but just going along as fresh as children writing down what they saw without literary devices or fanciness of expression. We made up haikus as we climbed, winding up and up now on the slopes of brush.

"Rocks on the side of the cliff," I said, "why don't they tumble down?"

"Maybe that's a haiku, maybe not, it might be a little too complicated," said Japhy. "A real haiku's gotta be as simple as porridge and yet make you see the real thing, like the greatest haiku of them all probably is the one that goes 'The sparrow hops along the veranda, with wet feet.' By Shiki. You see the wet footprints like a vision in your mind and yet in those few words you also see all the rain that's been falling that day and almost smell the wet pine needles."

"Let's have another."

"I'll make up one of my own this time, let's see, 'Lake below . . . the black holes the wells make,' no that's not a haiku goddammit, you never can be too careful about haiku."

"How about making them up real fast as you go along, spontaneously?"


60

"Look here," he cried happily, "mountain lupine, see the delicate blue color those little flowers have. And there's some California red poppy over there. The whole meadow is just powdered with color! Up there by the way is a genuine California white pine, you never see them much any more."

"You sure know a lot about birds and trees and stuff."

"I've studied it all my life." Then also as we went on climbing we began getting more casual and making funnier sillier talk and pretty soon we got to a bend in the trail where it was suddenly gladey and dark with shade and a tremendous cataracting stream was bashing and frothing over scummy rocks and tumbling on down, and over the stream was a perfect bridge formed by a fallen snag, we got on it and lay belly-down and dunked our heads down, hair wet, and drank deep as the water splashed in our faces, like sticking your head by the jet of a dam. I lay there a good long minute enjoying the sudden coolness.

"This is like an advertisement for Rainier Ale!" yelled Japhy.

"Let's sit awhile and enjoy it."

"Boy you don't know how far we got to go yet!"

"Well I'm not tired!"

"Well you'll be, Tiger."


61

9
We went on, and I was immensely pleased with the way the trail had a kind of immortal look to it, in the early afternoon now, the way the side of the grassy hill seemed to be clouded with ancient gold dust and the bugs flipped over rocks and the wind sighed in shimmering dances over the hot rocks, and the way the trail would suddenly come into a cool shady part with big trees overhead, and here the light deeper. And the way the lake below us soon became a toy lake with those black well holes perfectly visible still, and the giant cloud shadows on the lake, and the tragic little road winding away where poor Morley was walking back.

"Can you see Morl down back there?"

Japhy took a long look. "I see a little cloud of dust, maybe that's him comin back already." But it seemed that I had seen the ancient afternoon of that trail, from meadow rocks and lupine posies, to sudden revisits with the roaring stream with its splashed snag bridges and undersea greennesses, there was something inexpressibly broken in my heart as though I'd lived before and walked this trail, under similar circumstances with a fellow Bodhisattva, but maybe on a more important journey, I felt like lying down by the side of the trail and remembering it all. The woods do that to you, they


62

always look familiar, long lost, like the face of a long-dead relative, like an old dream, like a piece of forgotten song drifting across the water, most of all like golden eternities of past childhood or past manhood and all the living and the dying and the heartbreak that went on a million years ago and the clouds as they pass overhead seem to testify (by their own lonesome familiarity) to this feeling. Ecstasy, even, I felt, with flashes of sudden remembrance, and feeling sweaty and drowsy I felt like sleeping and dreaming in the grass. As we got higher we got more tired and now like two true mountainclimbers we weren't talking any more and didn't have to talk and were glad, in fact Japhy mentioned that, turning to me after a half-hour's silence, "This is the way I like it, when you get going there's just no need to talk, as if we were animals and just communicated by silent telepathy." So huddled in our own thoughts we tromped on, Japhy using that gazotsky trudge I mentioned, and myself finding my own true step, which was short steps slowly patiently going up the mountain at one mile an hour, so I was always thirty yards behind him and when we had any haikus now we'd yell them fore and aft. Pretty soon we got to the top of the part of the trail that was a trail no more, to the incomparable dreamy meadow, which had a beautiful pond, and after that it was boulders and nothing but boulders.

"Only sign we have now to know which way we're going, is ducks."

"What's ducks?"

"See those boulders over there?"

"See those boulders over there! Why God man, I see five miles of boulders leading up to that mountain."

"See the little pile of rocks on that near boulder there by the


63

pine? That's a duck, put up by other climbers, maybe that's one I put up myself in 'fifty-four I'm not sure. We just go from boulder to boulder from now on keeping a sharp eye for ducks then we get a general idea how to raggle along. Although of course we know which way we're going, that big cliff face up there is where our plateau is."

"Plateau? My God you mean that ain't the top of the mountain?"

"Of course not, after that we got a plateau and then scree and then more rocks and we get to a final alpine lake no biggern this pond and then comes the final climb over one thousand feet almost straight up boy to the top of the world where you'll see all California and parts of Nevada and the wind'll blow right through your pants."

"Ow . . . How long does it all take?"

"Why the only thing we can expect to make tonight is our camp up there on that plateau. I call it a plateau, it ain't that at all, it's a shelf between heights."

But the top and the end of the trail was such a beautiful spot I said: "Boy look at this ..." A dreamy meadow, pines at one end, the pond, the clear fresh air, the afternoon clouds rushing golden . . . "Why don't we just sleep here tonight, I don't think I've ever seen a more beautiful park."

"Ah this is nowhere. It's great of course, but we might wake up tomorrow morning and find three dozen schoolteachers on horseback frying bacon in our backyard. Where we're going you can bet your ass there won't be one human being, and if there is, I'll be a spotted horse's ass. Or maybe just one mountainclimber, or two, but I don't expect so at this time of the year. You know the snow's about to come here any time now. If it comes tonight it's goodbye me and you."


64

"Well goodbye Japhy. But let's rest here and drink some water and admire the meadow." We were feeling tired and great. We spread out in the grass and rested and swapped packs and strapped them on and were rarin to go. Almost instantaneously the grass ended and the boulders started; we got up on the first one and from that point on it was just a matter of jumping from boulder to boulder, gradually climbing, climbing, five miles up a valley of boulders getting steeper and steeper with immense crags on both sides forming the walls of the valley, till near the cliff face we'd be scrambling up the boulders, it seemed. "And what's behind that cliff face?"

"There's high grass up there, shrubbery, scattered boulders, beautiful meandering creeks that have ice in 'em even in the afternoon, spots of snow, tremendous trees, and one boulder just about as big as two of Alvah's cottages piled on top the other which leans over and makes a kind of concave cave for us to camp at, lightin a big bonfire that'll throw heat against the wall. Then after that the grass and the timber ends. That'll be at nine thousand just about."

With my sneakers it was as easy as pie to just dance nimbly from boulder to boulder, but after a while I noticed how gracefully Japhy was doing it and he just ambled from boulder to boulder, sometimes in a deliberate dance with his legs crossing from right to left, right to left and for a while I followed his every step but then I learned it was better for me to just spontaneously pick my own boulders and make a ragged dance of my own.

"The secret of this kind of climbing," said Japhy, "is like Zen. Don't think. Just dance along. It's the easiest thing in the world, actually easier than walking on flat ground which is


65

monotonous. The cute little problems present themselves at each step and yet you never hesitate and you find yourself on some other boulder you picked out for no special reason at all, just like Zen." Which it was.

We didn't talk much now. It got tiresome on the leg muscles. We spent hours, about three, going up that long, long valley. In that time it grew to late afternoon and the light was growing amber and shadows were falling ominously in the valley of dry boulders and instead, though, of making you feel scared it gave you that immortal feeling again. The ducks were all laid out easy to see: on top of a boulder you'd stand, and look ahead, and spot a duck (usually only two flat rocks on top of each other maybe with one round one on top for decoration) and you aimed in that general direction. The purpose of these ducks, as laid out by all previous climbers, was to save a mile or two of wandering around in the immense valley. Meanwhile our roaring creek was still at it, but thinner and more quiet now, running from the cliff face itself a mile up the valley in a big black stain I could see in the gray rock.

Jumping from boulder to boulder and never falling, with a heavy pack, is easier than it sounds; you just can't fall when you get into the rhythm of the dance. I looked back down the valley sometimes and was surprised to see how high we'd come, and to see farther horizons of mountains now back there. Our beautiful trail-top park was like a little glen of the Forest of Arden. Then the climbing got steeper, the sun got redder, and pretty soon I began to see patches of snow in the shade of some rocks. We got up to where the cliff face seemed to loom over us. At one point I saw Japhy throw down his pack and danced my way up to him.

"Well this is where we'll drop our gear and climb those few


66

hundred feet up the side of that cliff, where you see there it's shallower, and find that camp. I remember it. In fact you can sit here and rest or beat your bishop while I go ramblin around there, I like to ramble by myself."

Okay. So I sat down and changed my wet socks and changed soaking undershirt for dry one and crossed my legs and rested and whistled for about a half-hour, a very pleasant occupation, and Japhy got back and said he'd found the camp. I thought it would be a little jaunt to our resting place but it took almost another hour to jump up the steep boulders, climb around some, get to the level of the cliff-face plateau, and there, on flat grass more or less, hike about two hundred yards to where a huge gray rock towered among pines. Here now the earth was a splendorous thingsnow on the ground, in melting patches in the grass, and gurgling creeks, and the huge silent rock mountains on both sides, and a wind blowing, and the smell of heather. We forded a lovely little creek, shallow as your hand, pearl pure lucid water, and got to the huge rock. Here were old charred logs where other mountainclimbers had camped.

"And where's Matterhorn mountain?"

"You can't see it from here, but"pointing up the farther long plateau and a scree gorge twisting to the right"around that draw and up two miles or so and then we'll be at the foot of it."

"Wow, heck, whoo, that'll take us a whole other day!"

"Not when you're travelin with me, Smith."

"Well Ryderee, that's okay with me."

"Okay Smithee and now how's about we relax and enjoy ourselves and cook up some supper and wait for ole Morleree?"

So we unpacked our packs and laid things out and smoked


 67

and had a good time. Now the mountains were getting that pink tinge, I mean the rocks, they were just solid rock covered with the atoms of dust accumulated there since beginningless time. In fact I was afraid of those jagged monstrosities all around and over our heads.

"They're so silent!" I said.

"Yeah man, you know to me a mountain is a Buddha. Think of the patience, hundreds of thousands of years just sittin there bein perfectly perfectly silent and like praying for all living creatures in that silence and just waitin for us to stop all our frettin and foolin." Japhy got out the tea, Chinese tea, and sprinkled some in a tin pot, and had the fire going meanwhile, a small one to begin with, the sun was still on us, and stuck a long stick tight down under a few big rocks and made himself something to hang the teapot on and pretty soon the water was boiling and he poured it out steaming into the tin pot and we had cups of tea with our tin cups. I myself'd gotten the water from the stream, which was cold and pure like snow and the crystal-lidded eyes of heaven. Therefore, the tea was by far the most pure and thirstquenching tea I ever drank in all my life, it made you want to drink more and more, it actually quenched your thirst and of course it swam around hot in your belly.

"Now you understand the Oriental passion for tea," said Japhy. "Remember that book I told you about the first sip is joy the second is gladness, the third is serenity, the fourth is madness, the fifth is ecstasy."

"Just about old buddy."

That rock we were camped against was a marvel It was thirty feet high and thirty feet at base, a perfect square almost, and twisted trees arched over it and peeked down on us. From


68

the base it went outward, forming a concave, so if rain came we'd be partially covered. "How did this immense sonumbitch ever get here?"

"It probably was left here by the retreating glacier. See over there that field of snow?"

"Yeah."

"That's the glacier what's left of it. Either that or this rock tumbled here from inconceivable prehistoric mountains we can't understand, or maybe it just landed here when the frig-gin mountain range itself burst out of the ground in the Jurassic upheaval. Ray when you're up here you're not sittin in a Berkeley tea room. This is the beginning and the end of the world right here. Look at all those patient Buddhas lookin at us saying nothing."

"And you come out here by yourself. . . ."

"For weeks on end, just like John Muir, climb around all by myself following quartzite veins or making posies of flowers for my camp, or just walking around naked singing, and cook my supper and laugh."

"Japhy I gotta hand it to you, you're the happiest little cat in the world and the greatest by God you are. I'm sure glad I'm learning all this. This place makes me feel devoted, too, I mean, you know I have a prayer, did you know the prayer I use?"

"What?"

"I sit down and say, and I run all my friends and relatives and enemies one by one in this, without entertaining any angers or gratitudes or anything, and I say, like 'Japhy Ryder, equally empty, equally to be loved, equally a coming Buddha,' then I run on, say, to 'David O. Selznick, equally empty, equally to be loved, equally a coming Buddha' though I don't


69

use names like David O. Selznick, just people I know because when I say the words 'equally a coming Buddha' I want to be thinking of their eyes, like you take Morley, his blue eyes behind those glasses, when you think 'equally a coming Buddha' you think of those eyes and you really do suddenly see the true secret serenity and the truth of his coming Buddhahood. Then you think of your enemy's eyes."

"That's great, Ray," and Japhy took out his notebook and wrote down the prayer, and shook his head in wonder. "That's really really great. I'm going to teach this prayer to the monks I meet in Japan. There's nothing wrong with you Ray, your only trouble is you never learned to get out to spots like this, you've let the world drown you in its horseshit and you've been vexed . . . though as I say comparisons are odious, but what we're sayin now is true."

He took his bulgur rough cracked wheat and dumped a couple of packages of dried vegetables in and put it all in the pot to be ready to be boiled at dusk. We began listening for the yodels of Henry Morley, which didn't come. We began to worry about him.

"The trouble about all this, dammit, if he fell off a boulder and broke his leg there'd be no one to help him. It's dangerous to ... I do it all by myself but I'm pretty good, I'm a mountain goat."

"I'm gettin hungry."

"Me too dammit, I wish he gets here soon. Let's ramble around and eat snowballs and drink water and wait."

We did this, investigating the upper end of the flat plateau, and came back. By now the sun was gone behind the western wall of our valley and it was getting darker, pinker, colder, more hues of purple began to steal across the jags. The sky


70

was deep. We even began to see pale stars, at least one or two. Suddenly we heard a distant "Yodelayhee" and Japhy leaped up and jumped to the top of a boulder and yelled "Hoo hoo hoo!" The Yodelayhee came back.

"How far is he?"

"My God from the sound of it he's not even started. He's not even at the beginning of the valley of boulders. He can never make it tonight."

"What'll we do?"

"Let's go to the rock cliff and sit on the edge and call him an hour. Let's bring these peanuts and raisins and munch on 'em and wait. Maybe he's not so far as I think."

We went over to the promontory where we could see the whole valley and Japhy sat down in full lotus posture crosslegged on a rock and took out his wooden juju prayerbeads and prayed. That is, he simply held the beads in his hands, the hands upsidedown with thumbs touching, and stared straight ahead and didn't move a bone. I sat down as best I could on another rock and we both said nothing and meditated. Only I meditated with my eyes closed. The silence was an intense roar. From where we were, the sound of the creek, the gurgle and slapping talk of the creek, was blocked off by rocks. We heard several more melancholy Yodelayhees and answered them but it seemed farther and farther away each time. When I opened my eyes the pink was more purple all the time. The stars began to flash. I fell into deep meditation, felt that the mountains were indeed Buddhas and our friends, and I felt the weird sensation that it was strange that there were only three men in this whole immense valley: the mystic number three. Nirmanakaya, Sambhogakaya, and Dharmakaya. I prayed for the safety and in fact the eternal happiness of poor Morley.


71

Once I opened my eyes and saw Japhy sitting there rigid as a rock and I felt like laughing he looked so funny. But the mountains were mighty solemn, and so was Japhy, and for that matter so was I, and in fact laughter is solemn.

It was beautiful. The pinkness vanished and then it was all purple dusk and the roar of the silence was like a wash of diamond waves going through the liquid porches of our ears, enough to soothe a man a thousand years. I prayed for Japhy, for his future safety and happiness and eventual Buddhahood. It was all completely serious, all completely hallucinated, all completely happy.

"Rocks are space," I thought, "and space is illusion." I had a million thoughts. Japhy had his. I was amazed at the way he meditated with his eyes open. And I was mostly humanly amazed that this tremendous little guy who eagerly studied Oriental poetry and anthropology and ornithology and everything else in the books and was a tough little adventurer of trails and mountains should also suddenly whip out his pitiful beautiful wooden prayerbeads and solemnly pray there, like an oldfashioned saint of the deserts certainly, but so amazing to see it in America with its steel mills and airfields. The world ain't so bad, when you got Japhies, I thought, and felt glad. All the aching muscles and the hunger in my belly were bad enough, and the surroundant dark rocks, the fact that there is nothing there to soothe you with kisses and soft words, but just to be sitting there meditating and praying for the world with another earnest young man'twere good enough to have been born just to die, as we all are. Something will come of it in the Milky Ways of eternity stretching in front of all our phantom unjaundiced eyes, friends. I felt like telling Japhy everything I thought but I knew it didn't matter and more-


72

over he knew it anyway and silence is the golden mountain.

"Yodelayhee," sang Morley, and now it was dark, and Japhy said "Well, from the looks of things he's still far away. He has enough sense to pitch his own camp down there tonight so let's go back to our camp and cook supper."

"Okay." And we yelled "Hoo" a couple of times reassuringly and gave up poor Morl for the night. He did have enough sense, we knew. And as it turned out he did, and pitched his camp, wrapped up in his two blankets on top of the air mattress, and slept the night out in that incomparably happy meadow with the pond and the pines, telling us about it when he finally reached us the next day.

10
I rousted about and got a lot of little pieces of wood to make kindling for the fire and then I went around gathering bigger pieces and finally I was hunting out huge logs, easy to find all over the place. We had a fire that Morley must have seen from five miles away, except we were way up behind the cliff face, cut off from his view. It cast mighty blasts of heat against our cliff, the cliff absorbed it and threw it back, we were in a hot room except that the ends of our noses were nippy from sticking them out of that area to get firewood and water. Japhy put the bulgur in the pot with water and started


73

it boiling and stirred it around and meanwhile busied himself with the mixings for the chocolate pudding and started boiling that in a separate smaller pot out of my knapsack. He also brewed a fresh pot of tea. Then he whipped out his double set of chopsticks and pretty soon we had our supper ready and laughed over it. It was the most delicious supper of all time. Up out of the orange glow of our fire you could see immense systems of uncountable stars, either as individual blazers, or in low Venus droppers, or vast Milky Ways incommensurate with human understanding, all cold, blue, silver, but our food and our fire was pink and goodies. And true to what Japhy had predicted, I had absolutely not a jot of appetite for alcohol, I'd forgotten all about it, the altitude was too high, the exercise too heavy, the air too brisk, the air itself was enough to get your drunk ass drunk. It was a tremendous supper, food is always better eaten in doleful little pinchfuls off the ends of chopsticks, no gobbling, the reason why Darwin's law of survival applies best to China: if you don't know how to handle a chopstick and stick it in that family pot with the best of 'em, you'll starve. I ended up flupping it all up with my forefinger anyhow.

Supper done, Japhy assiduously got to scraping the pots with a wire scraper and got me to bring water, which I did dipping a leftover can from other campers into the fire pool of stars, and came back with a snowball to boot, and Japhy washed the dishes in preboiled water. "Usually I don't wash my dishes, I just wrap 'em up in my blue bandana, cause it really doesn't matter . . . though they don't appreciate this little bit of wisdom in the horse-soap building thar on Madison Avenue, what you call it, that English firm, Urber and Urber, whatall, damn hell and upsidedown boy I'll be as tight as Dick's hatband if


74

I don't feel like takin out my star map and seein what the lay of the pack is tonight. That houndsapack up there more uncountable than all your favorite Surangamy sutries, boy." So he whips out his star map and turns it around a little, and adjusts, and looks, and says, "It's exactly eight-forty-eight p.m."

"How do you know."

"Sirius wouldn't be where Sirius is, if it wasn't eight-forty-eight p.m. . . . You know what I like about you, Ray, you've woke me up to the true language of this country which is the language of the working men, railroad men, loggers. D'yever hear them guys talk?"

"I shore did. I had a guy, an oil rig driver, truck, picked me up in Houston Texas one night round about midnight after some little faggot who owned some motel courts called of all things and rather appropriately my dear, Dandy Courts, had left me off and said if you can't get a ride come on in sleep on my floor, so I wait about an hour in the empty road and here comes this rig and it's driven by a Cherokee he said he was but his name was Johnson or Ally Reynolds or some damn thing and as he talked starting in with a speech like 'Well boy I left my mammy's cabin before you knew the smell of the river and came west to drive myself mad in the East Texas oilfield' and all kinds of rhythmic talk and with every bang of rhythm he'd ram at his clutch and his various gears and pop up the truck and had her roaring down the road about seventy miles an hour with momentum only when his story got rolling with him, magnificent, that's what I call poetry."

"That's what I mean. You oughta hear old Burnie Byers talk up that talk up in the Skagit country, Ray you just gotta go up there."


75

"Okay I will."

Japhy, kneeling there studying his star map, leaning forward slightly to peek up through the overhanging gnarled old rock country trees, with his goatee and all, looked, with that mighty grawfaced rock behind him, like, exactly like the vision I had of the old Zen Masters of China out in the wilderness. He was leaning forward on his knees, upward looking, as if with a holy sutra in his hands. Pretty soon he went to the snowbank and brought back the chocolate pudding which was now ice cold and absolutely delicious beyond words. We ate it all up. "Maybe we oughta leave some for Morley." "Ah it won't keep, it'll melt in the morning sun." As the fire stopped roaring and just got to be red coals, but big ones six feet long, the night interposed its icy crystal feel 1 more and more but with the smell of smoking logs it was as delicious as chocolate pudding. For a while I went on a little walk by myself, out by the shallow iced creek, and sat meditating against a stump of dirt and the huge mountain walls on both sides of our valley were silent masses. Too cold to do this more than a minute. As I came back our orange fire casting its glow on the big rock, and Japhy kneeling and peering up at the sky, and all of it ten thousand feet above the gnashing world, was a picture of peace and good sense. There was another aspect of Japhy that amazed me: his tremendous and tender sense of charity. He was always giving things, always practicing what the Buddhists call the Paramita of Dana, the perfection of charity.

Now when I came back and sat down by the fire he said "Well Smith it's about time you owned a set of juju beads you can have these," and he handed me the brown wood beads run together over a strong string with the string, black


76

and shiny, coming out at the large bead at the end in a pretty loop.

"Aw you can't give me something like this, these things come from Japan don't they?"

"I've got another set of black ones. Smith that prayer you gave me tonight is worth that set of juju beads, but you can have it anyway." A few minutes later he cleaned out the rest of the chocolate pudding but made sure that I got most of it. Then when he laid boughs over the rock of our clearing and the poncho over that he made sure his sleeping bag was farther away from the fire than mine so I would sure to be warm. He was always practicing charity. In fact he taught me, and a week later I was giving him nice new undershirts I'd discovered in the Goodwill store. He'd turn right around and make me a gift of a plastic container to keep food in. For a joke I'd give him a gift of a huge flower from Alvah's yard. Solemnly a day later he'd bring me a little bouquet of flowers picked in the street plots of Berkeley. "And you can keep the sneakers too," he said. "I've got another pair older than those but just as good."

"Aw I can't be taking all your things."

"Smith you don't realize it's a privilege to practice giving presents to others." The way he did it was charming; there was nothing glittery and Christmasy about it, but almost sad, and sometimes his gifts were old beat-up things but they had the charm of usefulness and sadness of his giving.

We rolled into our sleeping bags, it was freezing cold now, about eleven o'clock, and talked a while more before one of us just didn't answer from the pillow and pretty soon we were asleep. While he snored I woke up and just lay flat back with my eyes to the stars and thanked God I'd come on this moun-


77

tain climb. My legs felt better, my whole body felt strong. The crack of the dying logs was like Japhy making little comments on my happiness. I looked at him, his head was buried way under inside his duck-down bag. His little huddled form was the only thing I could see for miles of darkness that was so packed and concentrated with eager desire to be good. I thought, "What a strange thing is man . . . like in the Bible it says, Who knoweth the spirit of man that looketh upward? This poor kid ten years younger than I am is making me look like a fool forgetting all the ideals and joys I knew before, in my recent years of drinking and disappointment, what does he care if he hasn't got any money: he doesn't need any money, all he needs is his rucksack with those little plastic bags of dried food and a good pair of shoes and off he goes and enjoys the privileges of a millionaire in surroundings like this. And what gouty millionaire could get up this rock anyhow? It took us all day to climb." And I promised myself that I would begin a new life. "All over the West, and the mountains in the East, and the desert, I'll tramp with a rucksack and make it the pure way." I went to sleep after burying my nose under the sleeping bag and woke up around dawn shivering, the ground cold had seeped through the poncho and through the bag and my ribs were up against a damper damp than the damp of a cold bed. My breath was coming out in steams. I rolled over to the other ribs and slept more: my dreams were pure cold dreams like ice water, happy dreams, no nightmares.

When I woke up again and the sunlight was a pristine orange pouring through the crags to the east and down through our fragrant pine boughs, I felt like I did when I was a boy and it was time to get up and go play all day Saturday, in overalls. Japhy was already up singing and blowing on his hands at a


78

small fire. White frost was on the ground. He rushed out a way and yelled out "Yodelayhee" and by God we heard it come right back at us from Morley, closer than the night before. "He's on his way now. Wake up Smith and have a hot cupa tea, do you good!" I got up and fished my sneakers out of the sleeping bag where they'd been kept warm all night, and put them on, and put on my beret, and jumped up and ran a few blocks in the grass. The shallow creek was iced over except in the middle where a rill of gurgles rolled like tinkly tinkly. I fell down on my belly and took a deep drink,'wetting my face. There's no feeling in the world like washing your face in cold water on a mountain morning. Then I went back and Japhy was heating up the remains of last night's supper and it was still good. Then we went out on the edge of the cliff and Hooed at Morley, and suddenly we could see him, a tiny figure two miles down the valley of boulders moving like a little animate being in the immense void. "That little dot down there is our witty friend Morley," said Japhy in his funny resounding voice of a lumberjack.

In about two hours Morley was within talking distance of us and started right in talking as he negotiated the final boulders, to where we were sitting in the now warm sun on a rock waiting.

"The Ladies' Aid Society says I should come up and see if you boys would like to have blue ribbons pinned on your shirts, they say there's plenty of pink lemonade left and Lord Mountbatten is getting mighty impatient. You think they'll investigate the source of that recent trouble in the Mid-East, or learn appreciate coffee better. I should think with a couple of literary gentlemen like you two they should learn to mind their manners . . ." and so on and so on, for no reason at all, yak-


79

king in the happy blue morning sky over rocks with his slaking grin, sweating a little from the long morning's work. "Well Morley you ready to climb Matterhorn?" "I'm ready just as soon as I can change these wet socks."

11
At about noon we started out, leaving our big packs at the camp where nobody was likely to be till next year anyway, and went up the scree valley with just some food and first-aid kits. The valley was longer than it looked. In no time at all it was two o'clock in the afternoon and the sun was getting that later more golden look and a wind was rising and I began to think "By gosh how we ever gonna climb that mountain, tonight?"

I put it up to Japhy who said: "You're right, we'll have to hurry."

"Why don't we just forget it and go on home?" "Aw come on Tiger, we'll make a run up that hill and then we'll go home." The valley was long and long and long. And at the top end it got very steep and I began to be a little afraid of falling down, the rocks were small and it got slippery and my ankles were in pain from yesterday's muscle strain anyway. But Morley kept walking and talking and I noticed his tremendous endurance. Japhy took his pants off so he could


80

look just like an Indian, I mean stark naked, except for a jockstrap, and hiked almost a quarter-mile ahead of us, sometimes waiting a while, to give us time to catch up, then went on, moving fast, wanting to climb the mountain today. Morley came second, about fifty yards ahead of me all the way. I was in no hurry. Then as it got later afternoon I went faster and decided to pass Morley and join Japhy. Now we were at about eleven thousand feet and it was cold and there was a lot of snow and to the east we could see immense snowcapped ranges and whooee levels of valleyland below them, we were already practically on top of California. At one point I had to scramble, like the others, on a narrow ledge, around a butte of rock, and it really scared me: the fall was a hundred feet, enough to break your neck, with another little ledge letting you bounce a minute preparatory to a nice goodbye one-thousand-foot drop. The wind was whipping now. Yet that whole afternoon, even more than the other, was filled with old premonitions or memories, as though I'd been there before, scrambling on these rocks, for other purposes more ancient, more serious, more simple. We finally got to the foot of Matterhorn where there was a most beautiful small lake unknown to the eyes of most men in this world, seen by only a handful of mountain-climbers, a small lake at eleven thousand some odd feet with snow on the edges of it and beautiful flowers and a beautiful meadow, an alpine meadow, flat and dreamy, upon which I immediately threw myself and took my shoes off. Japhy'd been there a half-hour when I made it, and it was cold now and his clothes were on again. Morley came up behind us smiling. We sat there looking up at the imminent steep scree slope of the final crag of Matterhorn. "That don't look much, we can do it!" I said glad now.


81

"No, Ray, that's more than it looks. Do you realize that's a thousand feet more?"

"That much?"

"Unless we make a run up there, double-time, we'll never make it down again to our camp before nightfall and never make it down to the car at the lodge before tomorrow morning at, well at midnight."

"Phew."

"I'm tired," said Morley. "I don't think I'll try it."

"Well that's right," I said. "The whole purpose of mountain-climbing to me isn't just to show off you can get to the top, it's getting out to this wild country."

"Well I'm gonna go," said Japhy.

"Well if you're gonna go I'm goin with you."

"Morley?"

"I don't think I can make it. I'll wait here." And that wind was strong, too strong, I felt that as soon as we'd be a few hundred feet up the slope it might hamper our climbing.

Japhy took a small pack of peanuts and raisins and said "This'll be our gasoline, boy. You ready Ray to make a double-time run?"

"Ready. What would I say to the boys in The Place if I came all this way only to give up at the last minute?"

"It's late so let's hurry." Japhy started up walking very rapidly and then even running sometimes where the climb had to be to the right or left along ridges of scree. Scree is long landslides of rocks and sand, very difficult to scramble through, always little avalanches going on. At every few steps we took it seemed we were going higher and higher on a terrifying elevator, I gulped when I turned around to look back and see all of the state of California it would seem stretching out in three


82

directions under huge blue skies with frightening planetary space clouds and immense vistas of distant valleys and even plateaus and for all I knew whole Nevadas out there. It was terrifying to look down and see Morley a dreaming spot by the little lake waiting for us. "Oh why didn't I stay with old Henry?" I thought. I now began to be afraid to go any higher from sheer fear of being too high. I began to be afraid of being blown away by the wind. All the nightmares I'd ever had about falling  off mountains and  precipitous buildings ran through my head in perfect clarity. Also with every twenty steps we took upward we both became completely exhausted.

"That's   because   of  the   high   altitude   now  Ray,"   said Japhy sitting beside me panting. "So have raisins and peanuts and you'll see what kick it gives you." And each time it gave us such a tremendous kick we both jumped up without a word and climbed another twenty, thirty steps. Then sat down again, panting, sweating in the cold wind, high on top of the world our noses sniffling like the noses of little boys playing late Saturday afternoon their final little games in winter. Now the wind began to howl like the wind in movies about the Shroud of Tibet. The steepness began to be too much for me; I was afraid now to look back any more; I peeked: I couldn't even make out Morley by the tiny lake.

"Hurry it up," yelled Japhy from a hundred feet ahead. "It's getting awfully late." I looked up to the peak. It was right there, I'd be there in five minutes. "Only a half-hour to go!" yelled Japhy. I didn't believe it. In five minutes of scrambling angrily upward I fell down and looked up and it was still just as far away. What I didn't like about that peak-top was that the clouds of all the world were blowing right through it like fog.

"Wouldn't see anything up there anyway," I muttered. "Oh


83

why did I ever let myself into this?" Japhy was way ahead of me now, he'd left the peanuts and raisins with me, it was with a kind of lonely solemnity now he had decided to rush to the top if it killed him. He didn't sit down any more. Soon he was a whole football field, a hundred yards ahead of me, getting smaller. I looked back and like Lot's wife that did it. "This is too high!" I yelled to Japhy in a panic. He didn't hear me. I raced a few more feet up and fell exhausted on my belly, slipping back just a little. "This is too high!" I yelled. I was really scared. Supposing I'd start to slip back for good, these screes might start sliding any time anyway. That damn mountain goat Japhy, I could see him jumping through the foggy air up ahead from rock to rock, up, up, just the flash of his boot bottoms. "How can I keep up with a maniac like that?" But with nutty desperation I followed him. Finally I came to a kind of ledge where I could sit at a level angle instead of having to cling not to slip, and I nudged my whole body inside the ledge just to hold me there tight, so the wind would not dislodge me, and I looked down and around and I had had it. "I'm stayin here!" I yelled to Japhy.

"Come on Smith, only another five minutes. I only got a hundred feet to go!"

"I'm staying right here! It's too high!"

He said nothing and went on. I saw him collapse and pant and get up and make his run again.

I nudged myself closer into the ledge and closed my eyes and thought "Oh what a life this is, why do we have to be born in the first place, and only so we can have our poor gentle flesh laid out to such impossible horrors as huge mountains and rock and empty space," and with horror I remembered the famous Zen saying, "When you get to the top of a moun-


84

tain, keep climbing." The saying made my hair stand on end; it had been such cute poetry sitting on Alvah's straw mats. Now it was enough to make my heart pound and my heart bleed for being born at all. "In fact when Japhy gets to the top of that crag he will keep climbing, the way the wind's blowing. Well this old philosopher is staying right here," and I closed my eyes. "Besides," I thought, "rest and be kind, you don't have to prove anything." Suddenly I heard a beautiful broken yodel of a strange musical and mystical intensity in the wind, and looked up, and it was Japhy standing on top of Matterhorn peak letting out his triumphant mountain-conquering Buddha Mountain Smashing song of joy. It was beautiful. It was funny, too, up here on the not-so-funny top of California and in all that rushing fog. But I had to hand it to him, the guts, the endurance, the sweat, and now the crazy human singing: whipped cream on top of ice cream. I didn't have enough strength to answer his yodel. He ran around up there and went out of sight to investigate the little flat top of some kind (he said) that ran a few feet west and then dropped sheer back down maybe as far as I care to the sawdust floors of Virginia City. It was insane. I could hear him yelling at me but I just nudged farther in my protective nook, trembling. I looked down at the small lake where Morley was lying on his back with a blade of grass in his mouth and said out loud "Now there's the karma of these three men here: Japhy Ryder gets to his triumphant mountaintop and makes it, I almost make it and have to give up and huddle in a bloody cave, but the smartest of them all is that poet's poet lyin down there with his knees crossed to the sky chewing on a flower dreaming by a gurgling plage, goddammit they'll never get me up here again."


85

12
I really was amazed by the wisdom of Morley now: "Him with all his goddamn pictures of snowcapped Swiss Alps" I thought.

Then suddenly everything was just like jazz: it happened in one insane second or so: I looked up and saw Japhy running down the mountain in huge twenty-foot leaps, running, leaping, landing with a great drive of his booted heels, bouncing five feet or so, running, then taking another long crazy yelling yodelaying sail down the sides of the world and in that flash I realized it's impossible to fall off mountains you fool and with a yodel of my own I suddenly got up and began running down the mountain after him doing exactly the same huge leaps, the same fantastic runs and jumps, and in the space of about five minutes I'd guess Japhy Ryder and I (in my sneakers, driving the heels of my sneakers right into sand, rock, boulders, I didn't care any more I was so anxious to get down out of there) came leaping and yelling like mountain goats or I'd say like Chinese lunatics of a thousand years ago, enough to raise the hair on the head of the meditating Morley by the lake, who said he looked up and saw us flying down and couldn't believe it. In fact with one of my greatest leaps and loudest screams of joy I came flying right down to the


86

edge of the lake and dug my sneakered heels into the mud and just fell sitting there, glad. Japhy was already taking his shoes off and pouring sand and pebbles out. It was great. I took off my sneakers and poured out a couple of buckets of lava dust and said "Ah Japhy you taught me the final lesson of them all, you can't fall off a mountain."

"And that's what they mean by the saying, When you get to the top of a mountain keep climbing, Smith."

"Dammit that yodel of triumph of yours was the most beautiful thing I ever heard in my life. I wish I'd a had a tape recorder to take it down."

"Those things aren't made to be heard by the people below," says Japhy dead serious.

"By God you're right, all those sedentary bums sitting around on pillows hearing the cry of the triumphant mountain smasher, they don't deserve it. But when I looked up and saw you running down that mountain I suddenly understood everything."

"Ah a little satori for Smith today," says Morley. "What were you doing down here?" "Sleeping, mostly."

"Well dammit I didn't get to the top. Now I'm ashamed of myself because now that I know how to come down a mountain I know how to go up and that I can't fall off, but now

it's too late."

"We'll come back next summer Ray and climb it. Do you realize that this is the first time you've been mountainclimbin and you left old veteran Morley here way behind you?"

"Sure," said Morley. "Do you think, Japhy, they would assign Smith the title of Tiger for what he done today?"


87

"Oh sure," says Japhy, and I really felt proud. I was a Tiger.

"Well dammit I'll be a lion next time we get up here."

"Let's go men, now we've got a long long way to go back down this scree to our camp and down that valley of boulders and then down that lake trail, wow, I doubt if we can make it before pitch dark."

"It'll be mostly okay." Morley pointed to the sliver of moon in the pinkening deepening blue sky. "That oughta light us a way."

"Let's go." We all got up and started back. Now when I went around that ledge that had scared me it was just fun and a lark, I just skipped and jumped and danced along and I had really learned that you can't fall off a mountain. Whether you can fall off a mountain or not I don't know, but I had learned that you can't. That was the way it struck me.

It was a joy, though, to get down into the valley and lose sight of all that open sky space underneath everything and finally, as it got graying five o'clock, about a hundred yards from the other boys and walking alone, to just pick my way singing and thinking along the little black cruds of a deer trail through the rocks, no call to think or look ahead or worry, just follow the little balls of deer crud with your eyes cast down and enjoy life. At one point I looked and saw crazy Japhy who'd climbed for fun to the top of a snow slope and skied right down to the bottom, about a hundred yards, on his boots and the final few yards on his back, yippeeing and glad. Not only that but he'd taken off his pants again and wrapped them around his neck. This pants bit of his was simply he said for comfort, which is true, besides nobody around to see him anyway, though I figured that when he went mountainclimb-


88

ing with girls it didn't make any difference to him. I could hear Morley talking to him in the great lonely valley: even across the rocks you could tell it was his voice. Finally I followed my deer trail so assiduously I was by myself going along ridges and down across creekbottoms completely out of sight of them, though I could hear them, but I trusted the instinct of my sweet little millennial deer and true enough, just as it was getting dark their ancient trail took me right to the edges of the familiar shallow creek (where they stopped to drink for the last five thousand years) and there was the glow of Japhy's bonfire making the side of the big rock orange and gay. The moon was bright high in the sky. "Well that moon's gonna save our ass, we got eight miles to go downtrail boys."

We ate a little and drank a lot of tea and arranged all our stuff. I had never had a happier moment in my life than those lonely moments coming down that little deer trace and when we hiked off with our packs I turned to take a final look up that way, it was dark now, hoping to see a few dear little deer, nothing in sight, and I thanked everything up that way. It had been like when you're a little boy and have spent a whole day rambling alone in the woods and fields and on the dusk homeward walk you did it all with your eyes to the ground, scuffling, thinking, whistling, like little Indian boys must  feel  when  they   follow  their  striding  fathers   from Russian River to Shasta two hundred years ago, like little Arab boys following their fathers, their fathers' trails; that singsong little joyful solitude, nose sniffling, like a little girl pulling her little brother home on the sled and they're both singing little ditties of their imagination and making faces at the ground and just being themselves before they have to go in the kitchen and put on a straight face again for the world


89

of seriousness. "Yet what could be more serious than to follow a deer trace to get to your water?" I thought. We got to the cliff and started down the five-mile valley of boulders, in clear moonlight now, it was quite easy to dance down from boulder to boulder, the boulders were snow white, with patches of deep black shadow. Everything was cleanly whitely beautiful in the moonlight. Sometimes you could see the silver flash of the creek. Far down were the pines of the meadow park and the pool of the pond.

At this point my feet were unable to go on. I called Japhy and apologized. I couldn't take any more jumps. There were blisters not only on the bottoms but on the sides of my feet, from there having been no protection all yesterday and today. So Japhy swapped and let me wear his boots.

With these big lightweight protective boots on I knew I could go on fine. It was a great new feeling to be able to jump from rock to rock without having to feel the pain through the thin sneakers. On the other hand, for Japhy, it was also a relief to be suddenly lightfooted and he enjoyed it. We made double-time down the valley. But every step was getting us bent, now, we were all really tired. With the heavy packs it was difficult to control those thigh muscles that you need to go down a mountain, which is sometimes harder than going up. And there were all those boulders to surmount, for sometimes we'd be walking in sand awhile and our path would be blocked by boulders and we had to climb them and jump from one to the other then suddenly no more boulders and we had to jump down to the sand. Then we'd be trapped in impassable thickets and had to go around them or try to crash through and sometimes I'd get stuck in a thicket with my rucksack, standing there cursing in the impossible moonlight. None


90

of us were talking. I was angry too because Japhy and Morley were afraid to stop and rest, they said it was dangerous at this point to stop.

"What's the difference the moon's shining, we can even

sleep."

"No, we've got to get down to that car tonight."

"Well let's stop a minute here. My legs can't take it."

"Okay, only a minute."

But they never rested long enough to suit me and it seemed to me they were getting hysterical. I even began to curse them and at one point I even gave Japhy hell: "What's the sense of killing yourself like this, you call this fun? Phooey." (Your ideas are a crock, I added to myself.) A little weariness'll change a lot of things. Eternities of moonlight rock and thickets and boulders and ducks and that horrifying valley with the two rim walls and finally it seemed we were almost out of there, but nope, not quite yet, and my legs screaming to stop, and me cursing and smashing at twigs and throwing myself on the ground to rest a minute.

"Come on Ray, everything comes to an end." In fact I realized I had no guts anyway, which I've long known. But I have joy. When we got to the alpine meadow I stretched out on my belly and drank water and enjoyed myself peacefully in silence while they talked and worried about getting down the rest of the trail in time.

"Ah don't worry, it's a beautiful night, you've driven yourself too hard. Drink some water and lie down here for about five even ten minutes, everything takes care of itself." Now I was being the philosopher. In fact Japhy agreed with me and we rested peacefully. That good long rest assured my bones I could make it down to the lake okay. It was beautiful


91

going down the trail. The moonlight poured through thick foliage and made dapples on the backs of Morley and Japhy as they walked in front of me. With our packs we got into a good rhythmic walk and enjoying going "Hup hup" as we came to switchbacks and swiveled around, always down, down, the pleasant downgoing swinging rhythm trail. And that roaring creek was a beauty by moonlight, those flashes of flying moon water, that snow white foam, those black-as-pitch trees, regular elfin paradises of shadow and moon. The air began to get warmer and nicer and in fact I thought I could begin to smell people again. We could smell the nice raunchy tide-smell of the lake water, and flowers, and softer dust of down below. Everything up there had smelled of ice and snow and heartless spine rock. Here there was the smell of sun-heated wood, sunny dust resting in the moonlight, lake mud, flowers, straw, all those good things of the earth. The trail was fun coming down and yet at one point I was as tired as ever, more than in that endless valley of boulders, but you could see the lake lodge down below now, a sweet little lamp of light and so it didn't matter. Morley and Japhy were talking a blue streak and all we had to do was roll on down to the car. In fact suddenly, as in a happy dream, with the suddenness of waking up from an endless nightmare and it's all over, we were striding across the road and there were houses and there were automobiles parked under trees and Morley's car was sitting right there.

"From what I can tell by feeling this air," said Morley, leaning on the car as we slung our packs to the ground, "it mustn't have froze at all last night, I went back and drained the crankcase for nothing."

"Well maybe it did freeze." Morley went over and got mo-


92

tor oil at the lodge store and they told him it hadn't been freezing at all, but one of the warmest nights of the year.

"All that mad trouble for nothing," I said. But we didn't care. We were famished. I said "Let's go to Bridgeport and go in one of those lunchcarts there boy and eat hamburg and potatoes and hot coffee." We drove down the lakeside dirt road in the moonlight, stopped at the inn where Morley returned the blankets, and drove on into the little town and parked oh the highway. Poor Japhy, it was here finally I found out his Achilles heel. This little tough guy who wasn't afraid of anything and could ramble around mountains for weeks alone and run down mountains, was afraid of going into a restaurant because the people in it were too well dressed. Morley and I laughed and said "What's the difference? We'll just go in and eat." But Japhy thought the place I chose looked too bourgeois and insisted on going to a more workingman-looking restaurant across the highway. We went in there and it was a desultory place with lazy waitresses letting us sit there five minutes without even bringing a menu. I got mad and said "Let's go to that other place. What you afraid of, Japhy, what's the difference? You may know all about mountains but I know about where to eat." In fact we got a little miffed at each other and I felt bad. But he came to the other place, which was the better restaurant of the two, with a bar on one side, many hunters drinking in the dim cocktail-lounge light, and the restaurant itself a long counter and a lot of tables with whole gay families eating from a very considerable selection. The menu was huge and good: mountain trout and everything. Japhy, I found, was also afraid of spending ten cents more for a good dinner. I went to the bar and bought a glass of port and brought it to our stool seats at the counter (Japhy:


93

"You sure you can do that?") and I kidded Japhy awhile. He felt better now. "That's what's the trouble with you Japhy, you're just an old anarchist scared of society. What difference does it make? Comparisons are odious."

"Well Smith it just looked to me like this place was full of old rich farts and the prices would be too high, I admit it, I'm scared of all this American wealth, I'm just an old bhikku and I got nothin to do with all this high standard of living, goddammit, I've been a poor guy all my life and I can't get used to some things."

"Well your weaknesses are admirable. I'll buy 'em." And we had a raving great dinner of baked potatoes and porkchops and salad and hot buns and blueberry pie and the works. We were so honestly hungry it wasn't funny and it was honest. After dinner we went into a liquor store where I bought a bottle of muscatel and the old proprietor and his old fat buddy looked at us and said "Where you boys been?"

"Climbin Matterhorn out there," I said proudly. They only stared at us, gaping. But I felt great and bought a cigar and lit up and said "Twelve thousand feet and we come down outa there with such an appetite and feelin so good that now this wine is gonna hit us just right." The old men gaped. We were all sunburned and dirty and wildlooking, too. They didn't say anything. They thought we were crazy.

We got in the car and drove back to San Francisco drinking and laughing and telling long stories and Morley really drove beautifully that night and wheeled us silently through the graying dawn streets of Berkeley as Japhy and I slept dead to the world in the seats. At some point or other I woke up like a little child and was told I was home and staggered out of the car and went across the grass into the cottage and opened my


94

blankets and curled up and slept till late the next afternoon a completely dreamless beautiful sleep. When I woke up the next day the veins in my feet were all cleared. I had worked the blood clots right out of existence. I felt very happy.

13
When I got up the next day I couldn't help smiling thinking of Japhy standing huddled in the night outside the fancy restaurant wondering if we would be let in or not. It was the first time I'd ever seen him afraid of anything. I planned to tell him about such things, that night, when he'd be coming over. But that night everything happened. First, Alvah left and went out for a few hours and I was alone reading when suddenly I heard a bike in the yard and I looked and it was

Princess.

"Where's everybody?" says she.

"How long can you stay?"

"I've got to go right away, unless I call my mother."

"Let's call."

"Okay."

We went down to the corner gas station pay phone, and she said she'd be home in two hours, and as we walked back along the sidewalk I put my arm around her waist but way around with my fingers digging into her belly and she said "Oooh, I


95

can't stand that!" and almost fell down on the sidewalk and bit my shirt just as an old woman was coming our way ogling us angrily and after she passed us we clinched in a big mad passionate kiss under the trees of evening. We rushed to the cottage where she spent an hour literally spinning in my arms and Alvah walked in right in the middle of our final ministrations of the Bodhisattva. We took our usual bath together. It was great sitting in the hot tub chatting and soaping each other's backs. Poor Princess, she meant every word she said. I really felt good about her, and compassionate, and even warned her: "Now don't go wild and get into orgies with fifteen guys on a mountaintop."

Japhy came after she left, and then Coughlin came and suddenly (we had wine) a mad party began in the cottage. It started off with Coughlin and me, drunk now, walking arm in arm down the main drag of town carrying huge, almost impossibly huge flowers of some kind we'd found in a garden, and a new jug of wine, shouting haikus and hoos and satoris at everybody we saw in the street and everybody was smiling at us. "Walked five miles carrying huge flower," yelled Coughlin, and I liked him now, he was deceptively scholarly looking or fatty-boomboom looking but he was a real man. We went to visit some professor of the English Department at U. of Cal. we knew and Coughlin left his shoes on the lawn and danced right into the astonished professor's house, in fact frightened him somewhat, though Coughlin was a fairly well known poet by now. Then barefooted with our huge flowers and jugs we went back to the cottage it was now about ten. I had just gotten some money in the mail that day, a fellowship of three hundred bucks, so I said to Japhy "Well I've learned everything now, I'm ready. How about driving me to Oakland


96

tomorrow and helping me buy all my rucksack and gear and stuff so I can take off for the desert?"

"Good, I'll get Morley's car and be over to get you first thing in the morning, but right now how about some of that wine?" I turned on the little red bandana dimbulb and we poured wine and all sat around talking. It was a great night of talk. First Japhy started telling his later life story, like when he was a merchant seaman in New York port and went around with a dagger on his hip, 1948, which surprised Alvah and me, and then about the girl he was in love with who lived in California: "I had a hardon for her three thousand miles long, goodness!"

Then Coughlin said "Tell 'em about Great Plum, Japh."

Instantly Japhy said "Great Plum Zen Master was asked what the great meaning of Buddhism was, and he said rush flowers, willow catkins, bamboo needles, linen thread, in other words hang on boy, the ecstasy's general, 's what he means, ecstasy of the mind, the world is nothing but mind and what is the mind? The mind is nothing but the world, goddammit. Then Horse Ancestor said 'This mind is Buddha.' He also said 'No mind is Buddha.' Then finally talking about Great Plum his boy, 'The plum is ripe.' "

"Well that's pretty interesting," said Alvah, "but Ou sont les neiges d'antan?"

"Well I sort of agree with you because the trouble is these people saw the flowers like they were in a dream but dammit-all the world is real Smith and Goldbook and everybody carries on like it was a dream, shit, like they were themselves dreams or dots. Pain or love or danger makes you real again, ain't that right Ray like when you were scared on that ledge?"

"Everything was real, okay."


97

"That's why frontiersmen are always heroes and were alii ways my real heroes and will always be. They're constantly on the alert in the realness which might as well be real as unreal, what difference does it make, Diamond Sutra says 'Make no formed conceptions about the realness of existence nor about the unrealness of existence," or words like that. Handcuffs will get soft and billy clubs will topple over, let's go on being free anyhow."

"The President of the United States suddenly grows crosseyed and floats away!" I yell.

"And anchovies will turn to dust!" yells Coughlin.

"The Golden Gate is creaking with sunset rust," says Alvah.

"And anchovies will turn to dust," insists Coughlin.

"Give me another slug of that jug. How! Ho! Hoo!" Japhy leaping up: "I've been reading Whitman, know what he says, Cheer up slaves, and horrify foreign despots, he means that's the attitude for the Bard, the Zen Lunacy bard of old desert paths, see the whole thing is a world full of rucksack wanderers, Dharma Bums refusing to subscribe to the general demand that they consume production and therefore have to work for the privilege of consuming, all that crap they didn't really want anyway such as refrigerators, TV sets, cars, at least new fancy cars, certain hair oils and deodorants and general junk you finally always see a week later in the garbage anyway, all of them imprisoned in a system of work, produce, consume, work, produce, consume, I see a vision of a great rucksack revolution thousands or even millions of young Americans wandering around with rucksacks, going up to mountains to pray, making children laugh and old men glad, making young girls happy and old girls happier, all of 'em


98

Zen Lunatics who go about writing poems that happen to appear in their heads for no reason and also by being kind and also by strange unexpected acts keep giving visions of eternal freedom to everybody and to all living creatures, that's what I like about you Goldbook and Smith, you two guys from the East Coast which I thought was dead." "We thought the West Coast was dead!" "You've really brought a fresh wind around here. Why, do you realize the Jurassic pure granite of Sierra Nevada with the straggling high conifers of the last ice age and lakes we just saw is one of the greatest expressions on this earth, just think how truly great and wise America will be, with all this energy and exuberance and space focused into the Dharma." "Oh"Alvah"balls on that old tired Dharma." "Ho!  What we need is a floating zendo, where an old Bodhisattva can wander from place to place and always be sure to find a spot to sleep in among friends and cook up mush." " 'The boys was glad, and rested up for more, and Jack cooked mush, in honor of the door,'" I recited. "What's that?"

"That's a poem I wrote. 'The boys was sittin in a grove of trees, listenin to Buddy explain the keys. Boys, sez he, the Dharma is a door . . . Let's see ... Boys, I say the keys, cause there's lotsa keys, but only one door, one hive for the bees. So listen to me, and I'll try to tell all, as I heard it long ago, in the Pure Land Hall. For you good boys, with wine-soaked teeth, that can't understand these words on a heath, I'll make it simpler, like a bottle of wine, and a good woodfire, under stars divine. Now listen to me, and when you have learned the Dharma of the Buddhas of old and yearned, to sit down with the truth, under a lonesome tree, in Yuma Arizony,


99

or anywhere you be, don't thank me for tellin, what was told me, this is the wheel I'm a-turnin, this is the reason I be: Mind is the Maker, for no reason at all, for all this creation, created to fall.' "

"Ah but that's too pessimistic and like dream gucky," says Alvah, "though the rhyme is pure like Melville."

"We'll have a floatin zendo for Buddy's winesoaked boys to come and lay up in and learn to drink tea like Ray did, learn to meditate like you should Alvah, and I'll be a head monk of a zendo with a big jar full of crickets."

"Crickets?"

"Yessir, that's what, a series of monasteries for fellows to go and monastate and meditate in, we can have groups of shacks up in the Sierras or the High Cascades or even Ray says down in Mexico and have big wild gangs of pure holy men getting together to drink and talk and pray, think of the waves of salvation can flow out of nights like that, and finally have women, too, wives, small huts with religious families, like the old days of the Puritans. Who's to say the cops of America and the Republicans and Democrats are gonna tell everybody what to do?"

"What's the crickets?"

"Big jar full of crickets, give me another drink Coughlin, about one tenth of an inch long with huge white antennae and hatch 'em myself, little sentient beings in a bottle that sing real good when they grow up. I wanta swim in rivers and drink goatmilk and talk with priests and just read Chinese books and amble around the valleys talking to farmers and their children. We've got to have mind-collecting weeks in our zendos where your mind tries to fly off like a Tinker Toy and like a good soldier you put it back together with your eyes


100

closed except of course the whole thing is wrong. D'y'hear my latest poem Goldbook?"

"No what?"

"Mother of children, sister, daughter of sick old man, virgin your blouse is torn, hungry and barelegged, I'm hungry too, take these poems."

"Fine, fine."

"I wanta bicycle in hot afternoon heat, wear Pakistan leather sandals, shout in high voice at Zen monk buddies standing in thin hemp summer robes and stubble heads, wanta live in golden pavilion temples, drink beer, say goodbye, go Yokahama big buzz Asia port full of vassals and vessels, hope, work around, come back, go, go to Japan, come back to U.S.A., read Hakuin, grit my teeth and discipline myself all the time while getting nowhere and thereby learn . . . learn that my body and everything gets tired and ill and droopy and so find out all about Hakuyu."

"Who's Hakuyu?"

"His name meant White Obscurity, his name meant he who lived in the hills back of Northern-White-Water where I'm gonna go hiking, by God, it must be full of steep piney gorges and bamboo valleys and little cliffs."

"I'll go with you!" (me).

"I wanta read about Hakuin, who went to see this old man who lived in a cave, slept with deer and ate chestnuts and the old man told him to quit meditating and quit thinking about koans, as Ray says, and instead learn how to go to sleep and wake up, said, when you go to sleep you should put your legs together and take deep breaths and then concentrate your mind on a spot one and a half inches below your navel until you feel it get like a ball of power and then start breathing


101

from your heels clear up and concentrate saying to yourself that that center just here is Amida's Pure Land, the center of the mind, and when you wake up you should start by consciously breathing and stretching a little and thinking the same thoughts, see, the rest of the time."

"That's what I like, see," says Alvah, "these actual signposts to something. What else?"

"The rest of the time he said don't bother about thinkin about nothin, just eat well, not too much, and sleep good, and old Hakuyu said he was three hundred friggin years old just then and figured he was good for five hundred more, by Gawd which makes me think he must still be up there if he's anybody at all."

"Or the sheepherder kicked his dog!" puts in Coughlin.

"I bet I can find that cave in Japan."

"You can't live in this world but there's nowhere else to go," laughs Coughlin.

"What's that mean?" I ask.

"It means the chair I sit in is a lion throne and the lion is walking, he roars."

"What's he say?"

"Says, Rahula! Rahula! Face of Glory! Universe chawed and swallowed!"

"Ah balls! "I yell.

"I'm goin to Marin County in a few weeks," said Japhy, "go walk a hunnerd times around Tamalpais and help purify the atmosphere and accustom the local spirits to the sound of sutra. What you think, Alvah?"

"I think it's all lovely hallucination but I love it sorta."

"Alvah, trouble with you is you don't do plenty night zazen especially when it's cold out, that's best, besides you should


102

get married and have halfbreed babies, manuscripts, homespun blankets and mother's milk on your happy ragged mat floor like this one. Get yourself a hut house not too far from town, live cheap, go ball in the bars once in a while, write and rumble in the hills and learn how to saw boards and talk to grandmas you damn fool, carry loads of wood for them, clap your hands at shrines, get supernatural favors, take flower-arrangement lessons and grow chrysanthemums by the door, and get married for krissakes, get a friendly smart sensitive human-being gal who don't give a shit for martinis every night and all that dumb white machinery in the kitchen." "Oh," says Alvah sitting up glad, "and what else?" "Think of barn swallows and nighthawks filling the fields. Do you know, say Ray, since yesterday I translated another stanza of Han Shan, lissen, 'Cold Mountain is a house, without beams or walls, the six doors left and right are open, the hall is the blue sky, the rooms are vacant and empty, the east wall strikes the west wall, at the center not one thing. Borrowers don't trouble me, in the cold I build a little fire, when I'm hungry I boil up some greens, I've got no use for the kulak with his big barn and pasture ... he just sets up a prison for himself, once in, he can't get out, think it over, it might happen to you.' "

Then Japhy picked up his guitar and got going on songs; finally I took the guitar and made up a song as I went along plucking on the strings any old way, actually drumming on them with my fingertips, drum drum drum, and sang the song of the Midnight Ghost freight train. "That's about the midnight ghost in California but you know what it made me think of Smith? Hot, very hot, bamboo growing up to forty feet out thar and whipping around in the breeze and hot and a


 103

bunch of monks are making a racket on their flutes somewhere and when they recite sutras with a steady Kwakiutl dance drumbeat and riffs on the bells and sticks it's something to hear like a big prehistoric coyote chanting. . . . Things tucked away in all you mad guys like that go back to the days when men married bears and talked to the buffalo by Gawd. Give me another drink. Keep your socks darned, boys, and your boots greased."

But as though that wasn't enough Coughlin says quite calmly crosslegged "Sharpen your pencils, straighten your ties, shine your shoes and button your flies, brush your teeth, comb your hair, sweep the floor, eat blueberry pies, open your eyes . . ."

"Eat blueberry spies is good," says Alvah fingering his lip seriously.

"Remembering all the while that I have tried very hard, but the rhododendron tree is only half enlightened, and ants and bees are communists and trolley cars are bored."

"And little Japanese boys in the F train sing Inky Dinky Parly Voo!" I yell.

"And the mountains live in total ignorance so I don't give up, take off your shoes and put 'em in your pocket. Now I've answered all your questions, too bad, give me a drink, mauvais sujet."

"Don't step on the ballsucker!" I yell drunk.

"Try to do it without stepping on the aardvark," says Coughlin. "Don't be a sucker all your life, dummy up, ya dope. Do you see what I mean? My lion is fed, I sleep at his side."

"Oh," says Alvah, "I wish I could take all this down." And I was amazed, pretty amazed, by the fast wonderful yak yak


104

yak darts in my sleeping brain. We all got dizzy and drunk. It was a mad night. It ended up with Coughlin and me wrestling and making holes in the wall and almost knocking the little cottage down: Alvah was pretty mad the next day. During the wrestling match I practically broke poor Coughlin's leg; myself, I got a bad splinter of wood stuck an inch up into my skin and it didn't come out till almost a year later. Meanwhile, at some point, Morley appeared in the doorway like a ghost carrying two quarts of yogurt and wanting to know if we wanted some. Japhy left at about two a.m. saying he'd come back and get me in the morning for our big day outfitting me with full pack. Everything was fine with the Zen Lunatics, the nut wagon was too far away to hear us. But there was a wisdom in it all, as you'll see if you take a walk some night on a suburban street and pass house after house on both sides of the street each with the lamplight of the living room, shining golden, and inside the little blue square of the television, each living family riveting its attention on probably one show; nobody talking; silence in the yards; dogs barking at you because you pass on human feet instead of on wheels. You'll see what I mean, when it begins to appear like everybody in the world is soon going to be thinking the same way and the Zen Lunatics have long joined dust, laughter on their dust lips. Only one thing I'll say for the people watching television, the millions and millions of the One Eye: they're not hurting anyone while they're sitting in front of that Eye. But neither was Japhy. ... I see him in future years stalking along with full rucksack, in suburban streets, passing the blue television windows of homes, alone, his thoughts the only thoughts not electrified to the Master Switch. As for me, maybe the answer was in my little Buddy poem that kept on: " 'Who played


 105

this cruel joke, on bloke after bloke, packing like a rat, across the desert flat?' asked Montana Slim, gesturing to him, the buddy of the men, in this lion's den. 'Was it God got mad, like the Indian cad, who was only a giver, crooked like the river? Gave you a garden, let it all harden, then comes the flood, and the loss of your blood? Pray tell us, good buddy, and don't make it muddy, who played this trick, on Harry and Dick, and why is so mean, this Eternal Scene, just what's the point, of this whole joint?' " I thought maybe I could find out at last from these Dharma Bums.

14
But I had my own little bangtail ideas and they had nothing to do with the "lunatic" part of all this. I wanted to get me a full pack complete with everything necessary to sleep, shelter, eat, cook, in fact a regular kitchen and bedroom right on my back, and go off somewhere and find perfect solitude and look into the perfect emptiness of my mind and be completely neutral from any and all ideas. I intended to pray, too, as my only activity, pray for all living creatures; I saw it was the only decent activity left in the world. To be in some riverbottom somewhere, or in a desert, or in mountains, or in some hut in Mexico or shack in Adirondack, and rest and be kind, and do nothing else, practice what the Chinese call


106

"do-nothing." I didn't want to have anything to do, really, either with Japhy's ideas about society (I figured it would be better just to avoid it altogether, walk around it) or with any of Alvah's ideas about grasping after life as much as you can because of its sweet sadness and because you would be dead some day.

When Japhy came to get me the following morning I had all this in mind. He and I and Alvah drove to Oakland in Morley's car and went first to some Goodwill stores and Salvation Army stores to buy various flannel shirts (at fifty cents a crack) and undershirts. We were all hung-up on colored undershirts, just a minute after walking across the street in the clean morning sun Japhy'd said, "You know, the earth is a fresh planet, why worry about anything?" (which is true) now we were foraging with bemused countenances among all kinds of dusty old bins filled with the washed and mended shirts of all the old bums in the Skid Row universe. I bought socks, one pair of long woolen Scotch socks that go way up over your knees, which would be useful enough on a cold night meditating in the frost. And I bought a nice little canvas jacket with zipper for ninety cents.

Then we drove to the huge Army Navy store in Oakland and went way in the back where sleeping bags were hanging from hooks and all kinds of equipment, including Morley's famous air mattress, water cans, flashlights, tents, rifles, canteens, rubber boots, incredible doodas for hunters and fishermen, out of which Japhy and I found a lot of useful little things for bhikkus. He bought an aluminum pot holder and made me a gift of it; it never burns you, being aluminum, and you just pluck your pots right out of a campfire with it. He selected an excellent duck-down used sleeping bag for me, zipping it open


 107

and examining the inside. Then a brand new rucksack, of which I was so proud. "I'll give you my own old sleeping-bag cover," he said. Then I bought little plastic snow glasses just for the hell of it, and railroad gloves, new ones. I figured I had good enough boots back home east, where I was going for Christmas, otherwise I would have bought a pair of Italian mountain boots like Japhy had.

We drove from the Oakland store to Berkeley again to the Ski Shop, where, as we walked in and the clerk came over, Japhy said in his lumberjack voice "Outfittin me friends for the Apocalypse." And he led me to the back of the store and picked out a beautiful nylon poncho with hood, which you put over you and even over your rucksack (making a huge hunchbacked monk) and which completely protects you from the rain. It can also be made into a pup tent, and can also be used as your sleeping mat under the sleeping bag. I bought a polybdenum bottle, with screw top, which could be used (I said to myself) to carry honey up to the mountains. But I later used it as a canteen for wine more than anything else, and later when I made some money as a canteen for whisky. I also bought a plastic shaker which came in very handy, just a tablespoon of powdered milk and a little creek water and you shake yourself up a glass of milk. I bought a whole bunch of food wraps like Japhy's. I was all outfitted for the Apocalypse indeed, no joke about that; if an atom bomb should have hit San Francisco that night all I'd have to do is hike on out of there, if possible, and with my dried foods all packed tight and my bedroom and kitchen on my head, no trouble in the world. The final big purchases were my cookpots, two large pots fitting into each other, with a handled cover that was also the frying pan, and tin cups, and small fitted-together cutlery


108

in aluminum. Japhy made me another present from his own pack, a regular tablespoon, but he took out his pliers and twisted the handle up back and said "See, when you wanta pluck a pot out of a big fire, just go flup." I felt like a new man.

15
I put on my new flannel shirt and new socks and underwear and my jeans and packed the rucksack tight and slung it on and went to San Francisco that night just to get the feel of walking around the city night with it on my back. I walked down Mission Street singing merrily. I went to Skid Row Third Street to enjoy my favorite fresh doughnuts and coffee and the bums in there were all fascinated and wanted to know if I was going uranium hunting. I didn't want to start making speeches about what I was going to hunt for was infinitely more valuable to mankind in the long run than ore, but let them tell me: "Boy, all you gotta do is go to that Colorady country and take off with your pack there and a nice little Geiger counter and you'll be a millionaire." Everybody in Skid Row wants to be a millionaire. "Okay boys," I said, "mebbe I'll do that." "Lotsa uranium up in the Yukon country too." "And down in Chihuahua," said an old man. "Bet any dough thar's uranium in Chihuahua." .


109

I went out of there and walked around San Francisco with my huge pack, happy. I went over to Rosie's place to see Cody and Rosie. I was amazed to see her, she'd changed so suddenly, she was suddenly skinny and a skeleton and her eyes were huge with terror and popping out of her face. "What's the matter?"

Cody drew me into the other room and didn't want me to talk to her. "She's got like this in the last forty-eight hours," he whispered.

"What's the matter with her?"

"She says she wrote out a list of all our names and all our sins, she says, and then tried to flush them down the toilet where she works, and the long list of paper stuck in the toilet and they had to send for some sanitation character to clean up the mess and she claims he wore a uniform and was a cop and took it with him to the police station and we're all going to be arrested. She's just nuts, that's all." Cody was my old buddy who'd let me live in his attic in San Francisco years ago, an old trusted friend. "And did you see the marks on her arms?"

"Yes." I had seen her arms, which were all cut up.

"She tried to slash her wrists with some old knife that doesn't cut right. I'm worried about her. Will you watch her while I go to work tonight?"

"Oh man"

"Oh you, oh man, don't be like that. You know what it says in the Bible, 'even unto the least of these . . .'"

"All right but I was planning on having fun tonight."

"Fun isn't everything. You've got some responsibilities sometimes, you know."

I didn't have a chance to show off my new pack in The


110

Place. He drove me to the cafeteria on Van Ness where I got Rosie a bunch of sandwiches with his money and I went back alone and tried to make her eat. She sat in the kitchen staring at me.

"But you don't realize what this means!" she kept saying. "Now they know everything about you."

"Who?"

"You."

"Me?"

"You, and Alvah, and Cody, and that Japhy Ryder, all of you, and me. Everybody that hangs around The Place. We're all going to be arrested tomorrow if not sooner." She looked at the door in sheer terror.

"Why'd you try to cut your arms like that? Isn't that a mean thing to do to yourself?"

"Because I don't want to live. I'm telling you there's going to be a big new revolution of police now."

"No, there's going to be a rucksack revolution," I said laughing, not realizing how serious the situation was; in fact Cody and I had no sense, we should have known from her arms how far she wanted to go. "Listen to me," I began, but she wouldn't listen.

"Don't you realize what's happening?" she yelled staring at me with big wide sincere eyes trying by crazy telepathy to make me believe that what she was saying was absolutely true. She stood there in the kitchen of the little apartment with her skeletal hands held out in supplicatory explanation, her legs braced, her red hair all frizzly, trembling and shuddering and grabbing her face from time to time.

"It's nothing but bullshit!" I yelled and suddenly I had the feeling I always got when I tried to explain the Dharma


111

to people, Alvah, my mother, my relatives, girl friends, everybody, they never listened, they always wanted me to listen to them, they knew, I didn't know anything, I was just a dumb young kid and impractical fool who didn't understand the serious significance of this very important, very real world.

"The police are going to swoop down and arrest us all and not only that but we're all going to be questioned for weeks and weeks and maybe even years till they find out all the crimes and sins that have been committed, it's a network, it runs in every direction, finally they'll arrest everybody in North Beach and even everybody in Greenwich Village and then Paris and then finally they'll have everybody in jail, you don't know, it's only the beginning." She kept jumping at sounds in the hall, thinking the cops were coming.

"Why don't you listen to me?" I kept pleading, but each time I said that, she hypnotized me with her staring eyes and almost had me for a while believing in what she believed from the sheer weight of her complete dedication to the discriminations her mind was making. "But you're getting these silly convictions and conceptions out of nowhere, don't you realize all this life is just a dream? Why don't you just relax and enjoy God? God is you, you fool!"

"Oh, they're going to destroy you, Ray, I can see it, they're going to fetch all the religious squares too and fix them good. It's only begun. It's all tied in with Russia though they won't say it ... and there's something I heard about the sun's rays and something about what happens while we're all asleep. Oh Ray the world will never be the same!"

"What world? What difference does it make? Please stop, you're scaring me. By God in fact you're not scaring me and I won't listen to another word." I went out, angry, bought


112

some wine and ran into Cowboy and some other musicians and ran back with the gang to watch her. "Have some wine, put some wisdom in your head."

"No, I'm laying off the lush, all that wine you drink is rot-gut, it burns your stomach out, it makes your brain dull. I can tell there's something wrong with you, you're not sensitive, you don't realize what's going on!"

"Oh come on."

"This is my last night on earth," she added.

The musicians and I drank up all the wine and talked, till about midnight, and Rosie seemed to be all right now, lying on the couch, talking, even laughing a bit, eating her sandwiches and drinking some tea I'd brewed her. The musicians left and I slept on the kitchen floor in my new sleeping bag. But when Cody came home that night and I was gone she went up on the roof while he was asleep and broke the skylight to get jagged bits of glass to cut her wrists, and was sitting there bleeding at dawn when a neighbor saw her and sent for the cops and when the cops ran out on the roof to help her that was it: she saw the great cops who were going to arrest us all and made a run for the roof edge. The young Irish cop made a flying tackle and just got a hold of her bathrobe but she fell out of it and fell naked to the sidewalk six flights below. The musicians, who lived downstairs in a basement pad, and had been up all night talking and playing records, heard the thud. They looked out the basement window and saw that horrible sight. "Man it broke us up, we couldn't make the gig that night." They drew the shades and trembled. Cody was asleep. . . . When I heard about it the next day, when I saw the picture in the paper showing an X on the sidewalk where she had landed, one of my thoughts


113

was: "And if she had only listened to me ... Was I talking so dumb after all? Are my ideas about what to do so silly and stupid and childlike? Isn't this the time now to start following what I know to be true?"

And that had done it. The following week I packed up and decided to hit the road and get out of that city of ignorance which is the modern city. I said goodbye to Japhy and the others and hopped my freight back down the Coast to L.A. Poor Rosieshe had been absolutely certain that the world was real and fear was real and now what was real? "At least," I thought, "she's in Heaven now, and she knows."

16
And that's what I said to myself, "I am now on the road to Heaven." Suddenly it became clear to me that there was a lot of teaching for me to do in my lifetime. As I say, I saw Japhy before I left, we wandered sadly to the Chinatown park, had a dinner in Nam Yuen's, came out, sat in the Sunday morning grass and suddenly here was this group of Negro preachers standing in the grass preaching to desultory groups of uninterested Chinese families letting their kiddies romp in the grass and to bums who cared just a little bit more. A big fat woman like Ma Rainey was standing there with her legs outspread howling out a tremendous sermon in a booming voice


114

that kept breaking from speech to blues-singing music, beautiful, and the reason why this woman, who was such a great preacher, was not preaching in a church was because every now and then she just simply had to go sploosh and spit as hard as she could off to the side in the grass, "And I'm tellin you, the Lawd will take care of you if you re-cognize that you have a new field . . . Yes!"and sploosh, she turns and spits about ten feet away a great sploosh of spit. "See," I told Japhy, "she couldn't do that in a church, that's her flaw as a preacher as far as the churches are concerned but boy have you ever heard a greater preacher?"

"Yeah," says Japhy. "But I don't like all that Jesus stuff she's talking about."

"What's wrong with Jesus? Didn't Jesus speak of Heaven? Isn't Heaven Buddha's nirvana?"

"According to your own interpretation, Smith."

"Japhy, there were things I wanted to tell Rosie and I felt suppressed by this schism we have about separating Buddhism from Christianity, East from West, what the hell difference does it make? We're all in Heaven now, ain't we?"

"Who said so?"

"Is this nirvana we're in now or ain't it?"

"It's both nirvana and samsara we're in now."

"Words, words, what's in a word? Nirvana by any other name. Besides don't you hear that big old gal calling you and telling you you've got a new field, a new Buddha-field boy?" Japhy was so pleased he wrinkled his eyes and smiled. "Whole Buddha-fields in every direction for each one of us, and Rosie was a flower we let wither."

"Never spoke more truly, Ray."

The big old gal came up to us, too, noticing us, especially


115

me. She called me darling, in fact. "I kin see from your eyes that you understand ever word I'm sayin, darling. I want you to know that I want you to go to Heaven and be happy. I want you to understand ever word I'm sayin."

"I hear and understand."

Across the street was the new Buddhist temple some young Chamber of Commerce Chinatown Chinese were trying to build, by themselves, one night I'd come by there and, drunk, pitched in with them with a wheelbarrow hauling sand from outside in, they were young Sinclair Lewis idealistic forward-looking kids who lived in nice homes but put on jeans to come down and work on the church, like you might expect in some midwest town some midwest lads with a bright-faced Richard Nixon leader, the prairie all around. Here in the heart of the tremendously sophisticated little city called San Francisco Chinatown they were doing the same thing but their church was the church of Buddha. Strangely Japhy wasn't interested in the Buddhism of San Francisco Chinatown because it was traditional Buddhism, not the Zen intellectual artistic Buddhism he lovedbut I was trying to make him see that everything was the same. In the restaurant we'd eaten with chopsticks and enjoyed it. Now he was saying goodbye to me and I didn't know when I'd see him again.

Behind the colored woman was a man preacher who kept rocking with his eyes closed saying "That's right." She said to us "Bless both you boys for listenin to what I have to say. Remember that we know that all things woik together for good to them that loves God, to them who are the called accordin to His purpose. Romans eight eighteen, younguns. And there's a new field a-waitin for ya, and be sure you live up to every one of your obligations. Hear now?"


116

"Yes, ma'am, be seein ya." I said goodbye to Japhy.

I spent a few days with Cody's family in the hills. He was tremendously sad about Rosie's suicide and kept saying he had to pray for her night and day at this particular crucial moment when because she was a suicide her soul was still flitting around the surface of the earth ready for either purgatory or hell. "We got to get her in purgatory, man." So I helped him pray when I slept on his lawn at night in my new sleeping bag. During the days I took down the little poems his children recited to me, in my little breastpocket notebooks. Yoo hoo . . . yoo hoo ... I come to you . . . Boo hoo . . . boo hoo ... I love you . . . Bloo bloo . . . the sky is blue . . . I'm higher than you . . . boo hoo . . . boo hoo. Meanwhile Cody was saying "Don't drink so much of that old wine."

Late Monday afternoon I was at the San Jose yards and waited for the afternoon Zipper due in at four-thirty. It was its day off so I had to wait for the Midnight Ghost due in at seven-thirty. Meanwhile as soon as it got dark I cooked my can of macaroni on a little Indian fire of twigs among the deep dense weeds by the track, and ate. The Ghost was coming in. A friendly switchman told me I'd better not try to get on it as there was a yard bull at the crossing with a big flashlight who would see if anybody was riding away on it and would phone ahead of Watsonville to have them thrown off. "Now that it's winter the boys have been breaking into the sealed trucks and breaking windows and leaving bottles on the floor, wreckin that train."

I sneaked down to the east end of the yard with heavy pack slung on, and caught the Ghost as she was coming out, beyond the bull's crossing, and opened the sleeping bag and took my shoes off, put them under my wrapped-up balled-up


117

coat and slipped in and slept beautiful joyous sleep all the way ; to Watsonville where I hid by the weeds till highball, got on again, and slept then all night long flying down the unbelievable coast and O Buddha thy moonlight O Christ thy starling on the sea, the sea, Surf, Tangair, Gaviota, the train going eighty miles an hour and me warm as toast in my sleeping bag flying ; down and going home for Christmas. In fact I only woke up rat about seven o'clock in the morning when the train was slow-Ing down into the L.A. yards and the first thing I saw, as I was putting my shoes on and getting my stuff ready to jump off, was a yard worker waving at me and yelling "Welcome to L.A.!"

But I was bound to get out of there fast. The smog was heavy, my eyes were weeping from it, the sun was hot, the air stank, a regular hell is L.A. And I had caught a cold from Cody's kids and had that old California virus and felt miserable now. With the water dripping out of reefer refrigerators I gathered up palmfuls and splashed it in my face and washed and washed my teeth and combed my hair and walked into L.A. to wait until seven-thirty in the evening when I planned to catch the Zipper firstclass freight to. Yuma Arizona. it was a horrible day waiting. I drank coffee in Skid Row coffee houses, South Main Street, coffee-and, seventeen cents.

At nightfall I was lurking around waiting for my train. A bum was sitting in a doorway watching me with peculiar Interest. I went over to talk to him. He said he was an ex-Marine from Paterson New Jersey and after a while he whipped out a little slip of paper he read sometimes on freight trains. I looked at it. It was a quotation from the Digha Nikaya, the words of Buddha. I smiled; I didn't say anything. He was a great voluble bum, and a bum who didn't drink, he was an


118

idealistic hobo and said "That's all there is to it, that's what I like to do, I'd rather hop freights around the country and cook my food out of tin cans over wood fires, than be rich and have a home or work. I'm satisfied. I used to have arthritis, you know, I was in the hospital for years. I found out a way to cure it and then I hit the road and I been on it ever since."

"How'd you cure your arthritis? I got thrombophlebitis myself."

"You do? Well this'll work for you too. Just stand on your head three minutes a day, or mebbe five minutes. Every morning when I get up whether it's in a riverbottom or right on a train that's rollin along, I put a little mat on the floor and I stand on my head and count to five hundred, that's about three minutes isn't it?" He was very concerned about whether counting up to five hundred made it three minutes. That was strange. I figured he was worried about his arithmetic record in school.

"Yeah, about that."

"Just do that every day and your phlebitis will go away like my arthritis did. I'm forty, you know. Also, before you go to bed at night, have hot milk and honey, I always have a little jar of honey" (he fished one out from his pack) "and I put the milk in a can and the honey, and heat it over the fire, and drink it. Just those two things."

"Okay." I vowed to take his advice because he was Buddha. The result was that in about three months my phlebitis disappeared completely, and didn't show up ever again, which is amazing. In fact since that time I've tried to tell doctors about this but they seem to think I'm crazy. Dharma Bum, Dharma Bum. I'll never forget that intelligent Jewish ex-Marine bum from Paterson New Jersey, whoever he was, with his little


 119

slip of paper to read in the raw gon night by dripping reefer platforms in the nowhere industrial formations of an America that is still magic America.

At seven-thirty my Zipper came in and was being made up by the switchmen and I hid in the weeds to catch it, hiding partly behind a telephone pole. It pulled out, surprisingly fast I thought, and with my heavy fifty-pound rucksack I ran out and trotted along till I saw an agreeable drawbar and took a hold of it and hauled on and climbed straight to the top of the box to have a good look at the whole train and see where my flatcar'd be. Holy smokes goddamn and all ye falling candles of heaven smash, but as the train picked up tremendous momentum and tore out of that yard I saw it was a bloody no-good eighteen-car sealed sonofabitch and at almost twenty miles an hour it was do or die, get off or hang on to my life at eighty miles per (impossible on a boxcar top) so I had to scramble down the rungs again but first I had to untangle my strap clip from where it had got caught in the catwalk on top so by the time I was hanging from the lowest rung and ready to drop off we were going too fast now. Slinging the rucksack and holding it hard in one hand calmly and madly I stepped off hoping for the best and turned everything away and only staggered a few feet and I was safe on ground. But now I was three miles into the industrial jungle of L.A. in mad sick sniffling smog night and had to sleep all that night by a wire fence in a ditch by the tracks being waked up all night by rackets of Southern Pacific and Santa Fe switchers bellyaching around, till fog and clear of midnight when I breathed better (thinking and praying in my sack) but then more fog and smog again and horrible damp white cloud of dawn and my bag too hot to sleep in and outside too raw to


120

stand, nothing but horror all night long, except at dawn a little bird blessed me.

The only thing to do was to get out of L.A. According to my friend's instructions I stood on my head, using the wire fence to prevent me from falling over. It made my cold feel a little better. Then I walked to the bus station (through tracks and side streets) and caught a cheap bus twenty-five miles to Riverside. Cops kept looking at me suspiciously with that big bag on my back. Everything was far away from the easy purity of being with Japhy Ryder in that high rock camp under peaceful singing stars.

17
It took exactly the entire twenty-five miles to get out of the smog of Los Angeles; the sun was clear in Riverside. I exulted to see a beautiful dry riverbottom with white sand and just a trickle river in the middle as we rolled over the bridge into Riverside. I was looking for my first chance to camp out for the night and try out my new ideas. But at the hot bus station a Negro saw me with my pack and came over and said he was part Mohawk and when I told him I was going back up the road to sleep in that riverbottom he said "No sir, you can't do that, cops in this town are the toughest in the state. If they see you down there they'll pull you in. Boy," said he, "I'd like to sleep outdoor too tonight but's against the law."


121

"This ain't India, is it," I said, sore, and walked off anyway to try it. It was just like the cop in the San Jose yards, even though it was against the law and they were trying to catch you the only thing to do was do it anyway and keep hidden. I laughed thinking what would happen if I was Fuke the Chinese sage of the ninth century who wandered around China constantly ringing his bell. The only alternative to sleeping out, hopping freights, and doing what I wanted, I saw in a vision would be to just sit with a hundred other patients in front of a nice television set in a madhouse, where we could be "supervised." I went into a supermarket and bought some concentrated orange juice and nutted cream cheese and whole wheat bread, which would make nice meals till tomorrow, when I'd hitchhike on through the other side of town. I saw many cop cruising cars and they were looking at me suspiciously: sleek, well-paid cops in brand-new cars with all that expensive radio equipment to see that no bhikku slept in his grove tonight.

At the highway woods I took one good look to make sure no cruisers were up or down the road and I dove right in the woods. It was a lot of dry thickets I had to crash through, I didn't want to bother finding the Boy Scout trail. I aimed straight for the golden sands of the riverbottom I could see up ahead. Over the thickets ran the highway bridge, no one could see me unless they stopped and got out to stare down. Like a criminal I crashed through bright brittle thickets and came out sweating and stomped ankle deep in streams and then when I found a nice opening in a kind of bamboo grove I hesitated to light a fire till dusk when no one'd see my small smoke, and make sure to keep it low embers. I spread my poncho and sleeping bag out on some dry rackety grove-


122

bottom leaves and bamboo splitjoints. Yellow aspens filled the afternoon air with gold smoke and made my eyes quiver. It was a nice spot except for the roar of trucks on the river bridge. My head cold and sinus were bad and I stood on my head five minutes. I laughed. "What would people think if they saw me?" But it wasn't funny, I felt rather sad, in fact real sad, like the night before in that horrible fog wire-fence country in industrial L.A., when in fact I'd cried a little. After all a homeless man has reason to cry, everything in the world is pointed against him.

It got dark. I took my pot and went to get water but had to scramble through so much underbrush that when I got back to my camp most of the water had splashed out. I mixed it in my new plastic shaker with orange-juice concentrate and shook up an ice-cold orange, then I spread nutted cream cheese on the whole-wheat bread and ate content. "Tonight," I thought, "I sleep tight and long and pray under the stars for the Lord to bring me to Buddhahood after my Buddhawork is done, amen." And as it was Christmas, I added "Lord bless you all and merry tender Christmas on all your rooftops and I hope angels squat there the night of the big rich real Star, amen." And then I thought, later, lying on my bag smoking, "Everything is possible. I am God, I am Buddha, I am imperfect Ray Smith, all at the same time, I am empty space, I am all things. I have all the time in the world from life to life to do what is to do, to do what is done, to do the timeless doing, infinitely perfect within, why cry, why worry, perfect like mind essence and the minds of banana peels" I added laughing remembering my poetic Zen Lunatic Dharma Bum friends of San Francisco whom I was beginning to miss now. And I added a little prayer for Rosie.


123

"If she'd lived, and could have come here with me, maybe I could have told her something, made her feel different. Maybe I'd just make love to her and say nothing."

I spent a long time meditating crosslegged, but the truck growl bothered me. Soon the stars came out and my little Indian fire sent up some smoke to them. I slipped in my bag at eleven and slept well, except for the bamboo joints under the leaves that caused me to turn over all night. "Better to sleep in an uncomfortable bed free, than sleep in a comfortable bed unfree." I was making up all kinds of sayings as I went along. I was started on my new life with my new equipment: a regular Don Quixote of tenderness. In the morning I felt exhilarated and meditated first thing and made up a little prayer: "I bless you, all living things, I bless you in the endless past, I bless you in the endless present, I bless you in the endless future, amen."

This little prayer made me feel good and fool good as I packed up my things and took off to the tumbling water that came down from a rock across the highway, delicious spring water to bathe my face in and wash my teeth in and drink. Then I was ready for the three-thousand-mile hitchhike to Rocky Mount, North Carolina, where my mother was waiting, probably washing the dishes in her dear pitiful kitchen.


124

18
The current song at that time was Roy Hamilton singing "Everybody's Got a Home but Me." I kept singing that as I swung along. On the other side of Riverside I got on the highway and got a ride right away from a young couple, to an airfield five miles out of town, and from there a ride from a quiet man almost to Beaumont, California, but five miles short of it on a double-lane speed highway with nobody likely to stop so I hiked on in in beautiful sparkling air. At Beaumont I ate hotdogs, hamburgers and a bag of fries and added a big strawberry shake, all among giggling high-school children. Then, the other side of town, I got a ride from a Mexican called Jaimy who said he was the son of the governor of the state of Baja California, Mexico, which I didn't believe and was a wino and had me buy him wine which he only threw up out the window as he drove: a droopy, sad, helpless young man, very sad eyes, very nice, a bit nutty. He was driving clear to Mexicali, a little off my route but good enough and far enough out toward Arizona to suit me.

At Calexico it was Christmas shopping time on Main Street with incredible perfect astonished Mexican beauties who kept getting so much better that when the first ones had re-passed they'd already become capped and thin in my mind, I was


125

standing there looking everywhichaway, eating an ice-cream cone, waiting for Jaimy who said he had an errand and would pick me up again and take me personally into Mexicali, Mexico, to meet his friends. My plan was to have a nice cheap supper in Mexico and then roll on that night. Jaimy didn't show up, of course. I crossed the border by myself and turned sharp right at the gate to avoid the hawker street and went immediately to relieve myself of water in construction dirt but a crazy Mexican watchman with an official uniform thought it was a big infringement and said something and when I said I didn't know (No se) he said "No sabes police?"the nerve of him to call the cops because I peed on his dirt ground. But I did notice afterward and felt sad, that I had watered the spot where he sat to light a small fire nights because there were wood coals piled so I moved up the muddy street feeling meek and truly sorry, with the big pack on my back, as he stared after me with his doleful stare.

I came to a hill and saw great mudflat riverbottoms with stinks and tarns and awful paths with women and burros ambling in the dusk, an old Chinese Mexican beggar caught my eye and we stopped to chat, when I told him I might go Dormiendo sleep in those flats (I was really thinking of a little beyond the flats, in the foothills) he looked horrified and, being a deafmute, he demonstrated that I would be robbed of my pack and killed if I tried it, which I suddenly realized was true. I wasn't in America any more. Either side of the border, either way you slice the boloney, a homeless man was in hot water. Where would I find a quiet grove to meditate in, to live in forever? After the old man tried to tell me his life story by signs I walked away waving and smiling and crossed the flats and narrow board bridge over the yellow


I26

water and over to the poor adobe district of Mexicali where the Mexico gaiety as ever charmed me, and I ate a delicious tin bowl of garbanzo soup with pieces of cabeza (head) and cebolla (onion) raw, having cashed a quarter at the border gate for three paper pesos and a big pile of huge pennies. While eating at the little mud street counter I dug the street, the people, the poor bitch dogs, the cantinas, the whores, the music, men goofing in the narrow road wrestling, and across the street an unforgettable beauty parlor (Salon de Belleza) with a bare mirror on a bare wall and bare chairs and one little seventeen-year-old beauty with her hair in pins dreaming at the mirror, but an old plaster bust with periwig beside her, and a big man with a mustache in a Scandinavian ski sweater picking his teeth behind and a little boy at the next mirror chair eating a banana and out on the sidewalk some little children gathered like before a movie house and I thought "Oh all Mexicali on some Saturday afternoon! Thank you O Lord for returning me my zest for life, for Thy ever-recurring forms in Thy Womb of Exuberant Fertility." All my tears weren't in vain. It'll all work out finally.

Then, strolling, I bought a hot doughnut stick, then two oranges from a girl, and re-crossed the bridge in dust of evening and headed for the border gate happy. But here I was stopped by three unpleasant American guards and my whole rucksack was searched sullenly.

"What'd you buy in Mexico?"

"Nothing."

They didn't believe me. They fished around. After fingering my wraps of leftover frenchfries from Beaumont and raisins and peanuts and carrots, and cans of pork and beans I made sure to have for the road, and half-loaves of whole wheat


127

bread they got disgusted and let me go. It was funny, really; they were expecting a rucksack full of opium from Sinaloa, no doubt, or weed from Mazatlan, or heroin from Panama. Maybe they thought I'd walked all the way from Panama. ; They couldn't figure me out.

I went to the Greyhound bus station and bought a short ticket to El Centro and the main highway. I figured I'd catch the Arizona Midnight Ghost and be in Yuma that same night and sleep in the Colorado riverbottom, which I'd noticed long ago. But it wound up, in El Centro I went to the yards and angled around and finally talked to a conductor passing the sign to a switch engine: "Where's the Zipper?"

"It don't come through El Centro."

I was surprised at my stupidity.

"Only freight you can catch goes through Mexico, then Yuma, but they'll find you and kick you out and you'll wind up in a Mexican calaboose boy."

"I've had enough of Mexico. Thanks." So I went to the big intersection in town with the cars turning for the eastward run to Yuma and started thumbing. I had no luck for an hour. Suddenly a big truck pulled up to the side; the driver got out and fiddled with his suitcase. "You goin on east?" I asked.

"Soon as I spend a little time in Mexicali. You know anything about Mexico?"

"Lived there for years." He looked me over. He was a good old joe, fat, happy, middlewestern. He liked me.

"How about showin me around Mexicali tonight then I'll drive you to Tucson."

"Great!" We got in the truck and went right back to Mexicali on the road I'd just covered in the bus. But it was worth it to get clear to Tucson. We parked the truck in Calexico,


128

which was quiet now, at eleven, and went over into Mexicali and I took him away from tourist-trap honkytonks and led him to the good old saloons of real Mexico where there were girls at a peso a dance and raw tequila and lots of fun. It was a big night, he danced and enjoyed himself, had his picture taken with a senorita and drank about twenty shots of tequila. Somewhere during the night we hooked up with a colored guy who was some kind of queer but was awfully funny and led us to a whorehouse and then as we were coming put a Mexican cop relieved him of his snapknife.

"That's my third knife this month those bastards stole from

me," he said.

In the morning Beaudry (the driver) and I got back to the truck bleary eyes and hungover and he wasted no time and drove right straight to Yuma, not going back to El Centro, but on the excellent no-traffic Highway 98 straight a hundred miles after hitting 80 at Gray Wells. Soon we were in fact coming into Tucson. We'd eaten a slight lunch outside Yuma and now he said he was hungry for a good steak. "Only thing is these truck stops ain't got big enough steaks to suit me."

"Well you just park your truck up one of these Tucson supermarkets on the highway and I'll buy a two-inch thick T-bone and we'll stop in the desert and I'll light a fire and broil you the greatest steak of your life." He didn't really believe it but I did it. Outside the lights of Tucson in a flaming red dusk over the desert, he stopped and I lit a fire with mesquite branches, adding bigger branches and logs later, as it got dark, and when the coals were hot I tried to hold the steak over them with a spit but the spit burned so I just fried the huge steaks in their own fat in my lovely new potpan cover and


129

handed him my jackknife and he went to it and said "Hm, om, wow, that is the best steak I ever et."

I'd also bought milk and we had just steak and milk, a great protein feast, squatting there in the sand as highway cars zipped by our little red fire. "Where'd you learn to do all these funny things?" he laughed. "And you know I say funny but there's sumpthin so durned sensible about 'em. Here I am killin myself drivin this rig back and forth from Ohio to L.A. and I make more money than you ever had in your whole life as a hobo, but you're the one who enjoys life and not only that but you do it without workin or a whole lot of money. Now who's smart, you or me?" And he had a nice home in Ohio with wife, daughter, Christmas tree, two cars, garage, lawn, lawnmower, but he couldn't enjoy any of it because he really wasn't free. It was sadly true. It didn't mean I was a better man than he was, however, he was a great man and I liked him and he liked me and said "Well I'll tell you, supposin I drive you all the way to Ohio."

"Wow, great! That'll take me just about home! I'm goin south of there to North Carolina."

"I was hesitatin at first on account of them Markell insurance men, see if they catch you ridin with me I'll lose my job."

"Oh hell . . . and ain't that somethin typical."

"It shore is, but I'll tell you sumpthin, after this steak you made for me, even though I paid for it, but you cooked it and here you are washin your dishes in sand, I'll just have to tell them to stick the job up their ass because now you're my friend and I got a right to give my friend a ride."

"Okay," I said, "and I'll pray we don't get stopped by no Markell insurance men."


I30

"Good chance of that because it's Saturday now and we'll be in Springfield Ohio at about dawn Tuesday if I push this rig and it's their weekend off more or less."

And did he ever push that rig! From that desert in Arizona he roared on up to New Mexico, took the cut through Las Cruces up to Alamogordo where the atom bomb was first blasted and where I had a strange vision as we drove along seeing in the clouds above the Alamogordo mountains the words as if imprinted in the sky: "This Is the Impossibility of the Existence of Anything" (which was a strange place for that strange true vision) and then he batted on through the beautiful Atascadero Indian country in the uphills of New Mexico beautiful green valleys and pines and New England-like rolling meadows and then down to Oklahoma (at outside Bowie Arizona we'd had a short nap at dawn, he in the truck, me in my bag in the cold red clay with just stars blazing silence overhead and a distant coyote), in no time at all he was going up through Arkansas and eating it up in one afternoon and then Missouri and St. Louis and finally on Monday night bashing across Illinois and Indiana and into old snowy Ohio with all the cute Christmas lights making my heart joy in the windows of old farms. "Wow," I thought, "all the way from the warm arms of the senoritas of Mexicali to the Christmas snows of Ohio in one fast ride." He had a radio on his dashboard and played it booming all the way, too. We didn't talk much, he just yelled once in a while, telling an anecdote, and had such a loud voice that he actually pierced my eardrum (the left one) and made it hurt, making me jump two feet in my seat. He was great. We had a lot of good meals, too, en route, in various favorite truckstops of his, one in Oklahoma where we had roast pork and yams worthy of my


 131

mother's own kitchen, we ate and ate, he was always hungry, in fact so was I, it was winter cold now and Christmas was on the fields and food was good.

In Independence Missouri we made our only stop to sleep in a room, in a hotel at almost five dollars apiece, which was robbery, but he needed the sleep and I couldn't wait in the below-zero truck. When I woke up in the morning, on Monday, I looked out and saw all the eager young men in business suits going to work in insurance offices hoping to be big Harry Trumans some day. By Tuesday dawn he let me off in downtown Springfield Ohio in a deep cold wave and we said goodbye just a little sadly.

I went to a lunchcart, drank tea, figured my budget, went to a hotel and had one good exhausted sleep. Then I bought a bus ticket to Rocky Mount, as it was impossible to hitchhike from Ohio to North Carolina in all that winter mountain country through the Blue Ridge and all. But I got impatient and decided to hitchhike anyway and asked the bus to stop on the outskirts and walked back to the bus station to cash my ticket. They wouldn't give me the money. The upshot of my insane impatience was that I had to wait eight more hours for the next slow bus to Charleston West Virginia. I started hitchhiking out of Springfield figuring to catch the bus in a town farther down, just for fun, and froze my feet and hands standing in dismal country roads in freezing dusk. One good ride took me to a little town and there I just waited around the tiny telegraph office which served as a station, till my bus arrived. Then it was a crowded bus going slowly over the mountains all night long and in the dawn the laborious climb over the Blue Ridge with beautiful timbered country in the snow, then after a whole day of stopping and starting, stopping


132

and starting, down out of the mountains into Mount Airy and finally after ages Raleigh where I transferred to my local bus and instructed the driver to let me off at the country road that wound three miles through the piney woods to my mother's house in Big Easonburg Woods which is a country crossroad outside Rocky Mount.

He let me off, at about eight p.m., and I walked the three miles in silent freezing Carolina road of moon, watching a jet plane overhead, her stream drifting across the face of the moon and bisecting the snow circle. It was beautiful to be back east in the snow at Christmas time, the little lights in occasional farm windows, the quiet woods, the piney barrens so naked and drear, the railroad track that ran off into the gray blue woods toward my dream.

At nine o'clock I was stomping with full pack across my mother's yard and there she was at the white tiled sink in the kitchen, washing her dishes, with a rueful expression waiting for me (I was late), worried I'd never even make it and probably thinking, "Poor Raymond, why does he always have to hitchhike and worry me to death, why isn't he like other men?" And I thought of Japhy as I stood there in the cold yard looking at her: "Why is he so mad about white tiled sinks and 'kitchen machinery' he calls it? People have good hearts whether or not they live like Dharma Bums. Compassion is the heart of Buddhism." Behind the house was a great pine forest where I would spend all that winter and spring meditating under the trees and finding out by myself the truth of all things. I was very happy. I walked around the house and looked at the Christmas tree in the window. A hundred yards down the road the two country stores made a bright warm scene in the otherwise bleak wooded void. I went to the dog


133

house and found old Bob trembling and snorting in the cold. He whimpered glad to see me. I unleashed him and he yipped and leaped around and came into the house with me where I embraced my mother in the warm kitchen and my sister and brother-in-law came out of the parlor and greeted me, and little nephew Lou too, and I was home again.

19
They all wanted me to sleep on the couch in the parlor by the comfortable oil-burning stove but I insisted on making my room (as before) on the back porch with its six windows looking out on the winter barren cottonfield and the pine woods beyond, leaving all the windows open and stretching my good old sleeping bag on the couch there to sleep the pure sleep of winter nights with my head buried inside the smooth nylon duck-down warmth. After they'd gone to bed I put on my jacket and my earmuff cap and railroad gloves and over all that my nylon poncho and strode out in the cotton-field moonlight like a shroudy monk. The ground was covered with moonlit frost/The old cemetery down the road gleamed in the frost. The roofs of nearby farmhouses were like white panels of snow. I went through the cottonfield rows followed by Bob, a big bird dog, and little Sandy who belonged to the Joyners down the road, and a few other stray dogs (all dogs love me) and came to the edge of the forest. In there, the pre-


134

vious spring, I'd worn out a little path going to meditate under a favorite baby pine. The path was still there. My official entrance to the forest was still there, this being two evenly spaced young pines making kind of gate posts. I always bowed there and clasped my hands and thanked Avalokitesvara for the privilege of the wood. Then I went in, led moonwhite Bob direct to my pine, where my old bed of straw was still at the foot of the tree. I arranged my cape and legs and sat to meditate.

The dogs meditated on their paws. We were all absolutely quiet. The entire moony countryside was frosty silent, not even the little tick of rabbits or coons anywhere. An absolute cold blessed silence. Maybe a dog barking five miles away toward Sandy Cross. Just the faintest, faintest sound of big trucks rolling out the night on 301, about twelve miles away, and of course the distant occasional Diesel baugh of the Atlantic Coast Line passenger and freight trains going north and south to New York and Florida. A blessed night. I immediately fell into a blank thoughtless trance wherein it was again revealed to me "This thinking has stopped" and I sighed because I didn't have to think any more and felt my whole body sink into a blessedness surely to be believed, completely relaxed and at peace with all the ephemeral world of dream and dreamer and the dreaming itself. All kinds of thoughts, too, like "One man practicing kindness in the wilderness is worth all the temples this world pulls" and I reached out and stroked old Bob, who looked at me satisfied. "All living and dying things like these dogs and me coming and going without any duration or self substance, O God, and therefore we can't possibly exist. How strange, how worthy, how good for us! What a horror it would have been if the world was real,


 135

because if the world was real, it would be immortal." My nylon poncho protected me from the cold, like a fitted-on tent, and I stayed a long time sitting crosslegged in the winter midnight woods, about an hour. Then I went back to the house, warmed up by the fire in the living room while the others slept, then slipped into my bag on the porch and fell asleep.

The following night was Christmas Eve which I spent with a bottle of wine before the TV enjoying the shows and the midnight mass from Saint Patrick's Cathedral in New York with bishops ministering, and doctrines glistering, and congregations, the priests in their lacy snow vestments before great official altars not half as great as my straw mat beneath a little pine tree I figured. Then at midnight the breathless little parents, my sister and brother-in-law, laying out the presents . under the tree and more gloriful than all the Gloria in Excelsis Deos of Rome Church and all its attendant bishops. "For after all," I thought, "Augustine was a spade and Francis my idiot brother." My cat Davey suddenly blessed me, sweet cat, with his arrival on my lap. I took out the Bible and read a little Saint Paul by the warm stove and the light of the tree, "Let him become a fool, that he may become wise," and I thought of good dear Japhy and wished he was enjoying the Christmas Eve with me. "Already are ye filled," says Saint Paul, "already are ye become rich. The saints shall judge the world." Then in a burst of beautiful poetry more beautiful than all the poetry readings of all the San Francisco Renaissances of Time: "Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats; but God shall bring to naught both it and them."

"Yep," I thought, "you pay through the nose for shortlived shows. . . ."


136

That week I was all alone in the house, my mother had to go to New York for a funeral, and the others worked. Every afternoon I went into the piney woods with my dogs, read, studied, meditated, in the warm winter southern sun, and came back and made supper for everybody at dusk. Also, I put up a basket and shot baskets every sundown. At night, after they went to bed, back I went to the woods in starlight or even in rain sometimes with my poncho. The woods received me well. I amused myself writing little Emily Dickinson poems like "Light a fire, fight a liar, what's the difference, in existence?" or "A watermelon seed, produces a need, large and juicy, such autocracy."

"Let there be blowing-out and bliss forevermore," I prayed in the woods at night. I kept making newer and better prayers. And more poems, like when the snow came, "Not oft, the holy snow, so soft, the holy bow," and at one point I wrote "The Four Inevitabilities: 1. Musty Books. 2. Uninteresting Nature. 3. Dull Existence. 4. Blank Nirvana, buy that boy." Or I wrote, on dull afternoons when neither Buddhism nor poetry nor wine nor solitude nor basketball would avail my lazy but earnest flesh, "Nothin to do, Oh poo! Practically blue." One afternoon I watched the ducks in the pig field across the road and it was Sunday, and the hollering preachers were screaming on the Carolina radio and I wrote: "Imagine blessing all living and dying worms in eternity and the ducks that eat 'em . . . there's your Sunday school sermon." In a dream I heard the words, "Pain, 'tis but a concubine's puff." But in Shakespeare it would say, "Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound." Then suddenly one night after supper as I was pacing in the cold windy darkness of the yard I felt tremendously depressed and threw myself right on the ground and cried


 137

"I'm gonna die!" because there was nothing else to do in the cold loneliness of this harsh inhospitable earth, and instantly the tender bliss of enlightenment was like milk in my eyelids and I was warm. And I realized that this was the truth Rosie knew now, and all the dead, my dead father and dead brother and dead uncles and cousins and aunts, the truth that is realizable in a dead man's bones and is beyond the Tree of Buddha as well as the Cross of Jesus. Believe that the world is an ethereal flower, and ye live. I knew this! I also knew that I was the worst bum in the world. The diamond light was in my eyes.

My cat meowed at the icebox, anxious to see what all the good dear delight was. I fed him.

20
After a while my meditations and studies began to bear fruit. It really started late in January, one frosty night in the woods in the dead silence it seemed I almost heard the words said: "Everything is all right forever and forever and forever." I let out a big Hoo, one o'clock in the morning, the dogs leaped up and exulted. I felt like yelling it to the stars. I clasped my hands and prayed, "O wise and serene spirit of Awakenerhood, everything's all right forever and forever and forever and thank you thank you thank you amen." What'd


138

I care about the tower of ghouls, and sperm and bones and dust, I felt free and therefore I was free.

I suddenly felt the desire to write to Warren Coughlin, who was strong in my thoughts now as I recalled his modesty and general silence among the vain screams of myself and Alvah and Japhy: "Yes, Coughlin, it's a shining now-ness and we've done it, carried America like a shining blanket into that brighter nowhere Already."

It began to get warmer in February and the ground began to melt a little and the nights in the woods were milder, my sleeps on the porch more enjoyable. The stars seemed to get wet in the sky, bigger. Under the stars I'd be dozing crosslegged under my tree and in my half-asleep mind I'd be saying "Moab? Who is Moab?" and I'd wake up with a burr in my hand, a cotton burr off one of the dogs. So, awake, I'd make thoughts like "It's all different appearances of the same thing, my drowsiness, the burr, Moab, all one ephemeral dream. All belongs to the same emptiness, glory be!" Then I'd run these words through my mind to train myself: "I am emptiness, I am not different from emptiness, neither is emptiness different from me; indeed, emptiness is me." There'd be a puddle of water with a star shining in it, I'd spit in the puddle, the star would be obliterated, I'd say "That star is real?"

I wasn't exactly unconscious of the fact that I had a good warm fire to return to after these midnight meditations, provided kindly for me by my brother-in-law, who was getting a little sick and tired of my hanging around not working. Once I told him a line from something, about how one grows through suffering, he said: "If you grow through suffering by this time I oughta be as big as the side of the house."


139

When I'd go to the country store to buy bread and milk the old boys there sitting around among bamboo poles and molasses barrels'd say, "What you do in those woods?" "Oh I just go in there to study." "Ain't you kinda old to be a college student?" "Well I just go in there sometimes and just sleep." But I'd watch them rambling around the fields all day looking for something to do, so their wives would think they were real busy hardworking men, and they weren't fooling me either. I knew they secretly wanted to go sleep in the woods, or just sit and do nothing in the woods, like I wasn't too ashamed to do. They never bothered me. How could I tell' them that my knowing was the knowing that the substance of my bones and their bones and the bones of dead men in the earth of rain at night is the common individual substance that is everlastingly tranquil and blissful? Whether they believed it or not makes no difference, too. One night in my rain cape I sat in a regular downpour and I had a little song to go with the pattering rain on my rubber hood: "Raindrops are ecstasy, raindrops are not different from ecstasy, neither is ecstasy different from raindrops, yea, ecstasy is raindrops, rain on, O cloud!" So what did I care what the old tobacco-chewing stickwhittlers at the crossroads store had to say about my mortal eccentricity, we all get to be gum in graves anyway. I even got a little drunk with one of the old men one time and we went driving around the country roads and I actually told him how I was sitting out in those woods meditating and he really rather understood and said he would like to try that if he had time, or if he could get up enough nerve, and had a little rueful envy in his voice. Everybody knows everything.


140

21
Spring came after heavy rains that washed everything, brown puddles were everywhere in moist, sere fields. Strong warm winds whipped snow white clouds across the sun and dry air. Golden days with beauteous moon at night, warm, one emboldened frog picking up a croak song at eleven p.m. in "Buddha Creek" where I had established my new straw sitting place under a twisted twin tree by a little opening in the pines and a dry stretch of grass and a tiny brook. There, one day, my nephew little Lou came with me and I took an object from the ground and raised it silently, sitting under the tree, and little Lou facing me asked "What's that?" and I said "That" and made a leveling motion with my hand, saying, "Tathata," repeating, "That . . . It's that" and only when I told him it was a pine cone did he make the imaginary judgment of the word "pine cone," for, indeed, as it says in the sutra: "Emptiness is discrimination," and he said "My head jumped out, and my brain went crooked and then my eyes started lookin like cucumbers and my hair'd a cowlick on it and the cowlick licked my chin." Then he said "Why don't I make up a poem?" He wanted to commemorate the moment. "Okay, but make it up right away, just as you go along."


 141

"Okay . . . 'The pine trees are wavin, the wind is tryin to whisper somethin, the birds are sayin drit-drit-drit, and the hawks are goin hark-hark-hark' Oho, we're in for danger."

"Why?"

"Hawkhark hark hark!"

"Then what?"

"Hark! Hark! Nothin." I puffed on my silent pipe, peace and quiet in my heart.

I called my new grove "Twin Tree Grove," because of the two treetrunks I leaned against, that wound around each other, white spruce shining white in the night and showing me from hundreds of feet away where I was heading, although old Bob whitely showed me the way down the dark path. On that path one night I lost my juju beads Japhy'd given me, but the next day I found them right in the path, figuring, "The Dharma can't be lost, nothing can be lost, on a well-worn path."

There were now early spring mornings with the happy dogs, me forgetting the Path of Buddhism and just being glad; looking around at new little birds not yet summer fat; the dogs yawning and almost swallowing my Dharma; the grass waving, hens chuckling. Spring nights, practicing Dhyana under the cloudy moon. I'd see the truth: "Here, this, is It. The world as it is, is Heaven, I'm looking for a Heaven outside what there is, it's only this poor pitiful world that's Heaven. Ah, if I could realize, if I could forget myself and devote my meditations to the freeing, the awakening and the blessedness of all living creatures everywhere I'd realize what there is, is ecstasy."

Long afternoons just sitting in the straw until I was tired of "thinking nothing" and just going to sleep and having little flash dreams like the strange one I had once of being up in

 


142

some kind of gray ghostly attic hauling up suitcases of gray meat my mother is handing up and I'm petulantly complaining: "I won't come down again!" (to do this work of the world). I felt I was a blank being called upon to enjoy the ecstasy of the endless truebody.

Days tumbled on days, I was in my overalls, didn't comb my hair, didn't shave much, consorted only with dogs and cats, I was living the happy life of childhood again. Meanwhile 1 wrote and got an assignment for the coming summer as a fire lookout for the U. S. Forest Service on Desolation Peak in the High Cascades in Washington state. So I figured to set out for Japhy's shack in March to be nearer Washington for my summer job.

Sunday afternoons my family would want me to go driving with them but I preferred to stay home alone, and they'd get mad and say "What's the matter with him anyway?" and I'd hear them argue about the futility of my "Buddhism" in the kitchen, then they'd all get in the car and leave and I'd go in the kitchen and sing "The tables are empty, everybody's gone over" to the tune of Frank Sinatra's "You're Learning the Blues." I was as nutty as a fruitcake and happier. Sunday afternoon, then, I'd go to my woods with the dogs and sit and put out my hands palms up and accept handfuls of sun boiling over the palms. "Nirvana is the moving paw," I'd say, seeing the first thing I saw as I opened my eyes from meditation, that being Bob's paw moving in the grass as he dreamed. Then I'd go back to the house on my clear, pure, well-traveled path, waiting for the night when again I'd see the countless Buddhas hiding in the moonlight air.

But my serenity was finally disturbed by a curious argument with my brother-in-law; he began to resent my un-


143

shackling Bob the dog and taking him in the woods with me. "I've got too much money invested in that dog to untie him from his chain."

I said "How would you like to be tied to a chain and cry all day like the dog?"

He replied "It doesn't bother me" and my sister said "And / don't care."

I got so mad I stomped off into the woods, it was a Sunday afternoon, and resolved to sit there without food till midnight and come back and pack my things in the night and leave. But in a few hours my mother was calling me from the back porch to supper, I wouldn't come; finally little Lou came out to my tree and begged me to come back.

I had frogs in the little brook that kept croaking at the oddest times, interrupting my meditations as if by design, once at high noon a frog croaked three times and was silent the rest of the day, as though expounding me the Triple Vehicle. Now my frog croaked once. I felt it was a signal meaning the One Vehicle of Compassion and went back determined to overlook the whole thing, even my pity about the dog. What a sad and bootless dream. In the woods again that night, fingering the juju beads, I went through curious prayers like these: "My pride is hurt, that is emptiness; my business is with the Dharma, that is emptiness; I'm proud of my kindness to animals, that is emptiness; my conception of the chain, that is emptiness; Ananda's pity, even that is emptiness." Perhaps if some old Zen Master had been on the scene, he would have gone out and kicked the dog on his chain to give everybody a sudden shot of awakening. My pain was in getting rid of the conception of people and dogs anyway, and of myself. I was hurting deep inside from the sad business of


144

trying to deny what was. In any case it was a tender little drama in the Sunday countryside: "Raymond doesn't want the dog chained." But then suddenly under the tree at night, I had the astonishing idea: "Everything is empty but awake! Things are empty in time and space and mind." I figured it all out and the next day feeling very exhilarated I felt the time had come to explain everything to my family. They laughed more than anything else. "But listen! No! Look! It's simple, let me lay it out as simple and concise as I can. All things are empty, ain't they?"

"Whattayou mean, empty, I'm holding this orange in my hand, ain't I?"

"It's empty, everythin's empty, things come but to go, all things made have to be unmade, and they'll have to be unmade simply because they were made!"

Nobody would buy even that.

"You and your Buddha, why don't you stick to the religion you were born with?" my mother and sister said.

"Everything's gone, already gone, already come and gone," I yelled. "Ah," stomping around, coming back, "and things are empty because they appear, don't they, you see them, but they're made up of atoms that can't be measured or weighed or taken hold of, even the dumb scientists know that now, there isn't any finding of the farthest atom so-called, things are just empty arrangements of something that seems solid appearing in the space, they ain't either big or small, near or far, true or false, they're ghosts pure and simple."

"Ghostses!" yelled little Lou amazed. He really agreed with me but he was afraid of my insistence on "Ghostses."

"Look," said my brother-in-law, "if things were empty how


145

could I feel this orange, in fact taste it and swallow it, answer me that one."

"Your mind makes out the orange by seeing it, hearing it, touching it, smelling it, tasting it and thinking about it but without this mind, you call it, the orange would not be seen or heard or smelled or tasted or even mentally noticed, it's actually, that orange, depending on your mind to exist! Don't you see that? By itself it's a no-thing, it's really mental, it's seen only of your mind. In other words it's empty and awake."

"Well, if that's so, I still don't care." All enthusiastic I went back to the woods that night and thought, "What does it mean that I am in this endless universe, thinking that I'm a man sitting under the stars on the terrace of the earth, but actually empty and awake throughout the emptiness and awakedness of everything? It means that I'm empty and awake, that I know I'm empty, awake, and that there's no difference between me and anything else. In other words it means that I've become the same as everything else. It means I've become a Buddha." I really felt that and believed it and exulted to think what I had to tell Japhy now when I got back to California. "At least he'll listen," I pouted. I felt great compassion for the trees because we were the same thing; I petted the dogs who didn't argue with me ever. All dogs love God. They're wiser than their masters. I told that to the dogs, too, they listened to me perking up their ears and licking my face. They didn't care one way or the other as long as I was there. St. Raymond of the Dogs is who I was that year, if no one or nothing else.

Sometimes in the woods I'd just sit and stare at things


146

themselves, trying to divine the secret of existence anyway. I'd stare at the holy yellow long bowing weeds that faced my grass sitmat of Tathagata Seat of Purity as they pointed in all directions and hairily conversed as the winds dictated Ta Ta Ta, in gossip groups with some lone weeds proud to show off on the side, or sick ones and half-dead falling ones, the whole congregation of living weedhood in the wind suddenly ringing like bells and jumping to get excited and all made of yellow stuff and sticking to the ground and I'd think This is it. "Rop rop rop," I'd yell at the weeds, and triey'd show windward pointing intelligent reachers to indicate and flail and finagle, some rooted in blossom imagination earth moist perturbation idea that had karmacized their very root-and-stem. ... It was eerie. I'd fall asleep and dream the words "By this teaching the earth came to an end," and I'd dream of my Ma nodding solemnly with her whole head, umph, and eyes closed. What did I care about all the irking hurts and tedious wronks of the world, the human bones are but vain lines dawdling, the whole universe a blank mold of stars. "I am Bhikku Blank Rat!" I dreamed.

What did I care about the squawk of the little very self which wanders everywhere? I was dealing in outblownness, cut-off-ness, snipped, blownoutness, putoutness, turned-off-ness, nothing-happens-ness, gone-ness, gone-out-ness, the snapped link, nir, link, vana, snap! "The dust of my thoughts collected into a globe," I thought, "in this ageless solitude," I thought, and really smiled, because I was seeing the white light everywhere everything at last.

The warm wind made the pines talk deep one night when I began to experience what is called "Samapatti," which in Sanskrit means Transcendental Visits. I'd got a little drowsy in


147

the mind but was somehow physically wide awake sitting erect under my tree when suddenly I saw flowers, pink worlds of walls of them, salmon pink, in the Shh of silent woods (obtaining nirvana is like locating silence) and I saw an ancient vision of Dipankara Buddha who was the Buddha who never said anything, Dipankara as a vast snowy Pyramid Buddha with bushy wild black eyebrows like John L. Lewis and a terrible stare, all in an old location, an ancient snowy field like Alban ("A new field!" had yelled the Negro preacherwoman), the whole vision making my hair rise. I remember the strange magic final cry that it evoked in me, whatever it means: Coly-alcolor. It, the vision, was devoid of any sensation of I being myself, it was pure egolessness, just simply wild ethereal activities devoid of any wrong predicates . . . devoid of effort, devoid of mistake. "Everything's all right," I thought. "Form is emptiness and emptiness is form and we're here forever in one form or another which is empty. What the dead have accomplished, this rich silent hush of the Pure Awakened Land." I felt like crying out over the woods and rooftops of North Carolina announcing the glorious and simple truth. Then I said "I've got my full rucksack pack and it's spring, I'm going to go southwest to the dry land, to the long lone land of Texas and Chihuahua and the gay streets of Mexico night, music coming out of doors, girls, wine, weed, wild hats, viva! What does it matter? Like the ants that have nothing to do but dig all day, I have nothing to do but do what I want and be kind and remain nevertheless uninfluenced by imaginary judgments and pray for the light." Sitting in my Buddha-arbor, therefore, in that "colyalcolor" wall of flowers pink and red and ivory white, among aviaries of magic transcendent birds recognizing my awakening mind with sweet weird cries


148

(the pathless lark), in the ethereal perfume, mysteriously ancient, the bliss of the Buddha-fields, I saw that my life was a vast glowing empty page and I could do anything I wanted.

A strange thing happened the next day, to illustrate the true power I had gained from these magic visions. My mother had been coughing for five days and her nose was running and now her throat was beginning to hurt so much that her coughs were painful and sounded dangerous to me. I decided to go into a deep trance and hypnotize myself, reminding myself "All is empty and awake," to investigate the cause and cure of my mother's illness. Instantly, in my closed eyes, I saw a vision of a brandy bottle which then I saw to be "Heet" rubbing medicine and on top of that, superimposed like a movie fade-in, I saw a distinct picture of little white flowers, round, with small petals. I instantly got up, it was midnight, my mother was coughing in her bed, and I went and took several bowls of bachelor's buttons my sister had arranged around the house the week before and I set them outside. Then I took some "Heet" out of the medicine cabinet and told my mother to rub it on her neck. The next day her cough was gone. Later on, after I was gone hitchhiking west, a nurse friend of ours heard the story and said "Yes, it sounds like an allergy to the flowers." During this vision and this action I knew perfectly clearly that people get sick by utilizing physical opportunities to punish themselves because of their self-regulating God nature, or Buddha nature, or Allah nature, or any name you want to give God, and everything worked automatically that way. This was my first and last "miracle" because I was afraid of getting too interested in this and becoming vain. I was a little scared too, of all the responsibility.


149

Everybody in the family heard of my vision and what I did but they didn't seem to think much of it: in fact I didn't, either. And that was right. I was very rich now, a super myriad trillionaire in Samapatti transcendental graces, because of good humble karma, maybe because I had pitied the dog and forgiven men. But I knew now that I was a bliss heir, and that the final sin, the worst, is righteousness. So I would shut up and just hit the road and go see Japhy. "Don't let the blues make you bad," sings Frank Sinatra. On my final night in the woods, the eve of my departure by thumb, I heard the word "star-body" concerning how things don't have to be made to disappear but to awake, to their supremely pure truebody and star-body. I saw there was nothing to do because nothing ever happened, nothing ever would happen, all things were empty light. So I took off well fortified, with my pack, kissing my mother goodbye. She had paid five dollars to have brand new thick rubber soles with cleats put on the bottom of my old boots and now I was all set for a summer working in the mountains. Our old country-store friend, Buddhy Tom, a character in his own right, took me in his vehicle out to Highway 64 and there we waved goodbye and I started hitching three thousand miles back to California. I would be home again the next Christmas.


150

22
Meanwhile Japhy was waiting for me in his nice little shack in Corte Madera California. He was settled in Sean Monahan's hermitage, a wooden cabin built behind a cypress windrow on a steep little grassy hill also covered with eucalyptus and pine, behind Sean's main house. The shack had been built by an old man to die in, years ago. It was well built. I was invited to go live there as long as I wanted, rent free. The shack had been made habitable after years as a wreck, by Sean Monahan's brother-in-law Whitey Jones, a good young carpenter, who had put in burlap over the wood walls and a good woodstove and a kerosene lamp and then never lived in it, having to go to work out of town. So Japhy'd moved in to finish his studies and live the good solitary life. If anybody wanted to go see him it was a steep climb. On the floor were woven grass mats and Japhy said in a letter "I sit and smoke a pipe and drink tea and hear the wind beat the slender eucalyptus limbs like whips and the cypress windrow roars." He'd stay there until May 15, his sailing date for Japan, where he had been invited by an American foundation to stay in a monastery and study under a Master. "Meanwhile," wrote Japhy, "come share a wild man's dark cabin with wine and weekend girls and good pots of food and woodfire heat. Monahan will


151

give us grocery bucks to fall a few trees in his big yard and buck and split 'em out for firewood and I'll teach you all about logging."

During that winter Japhy had hitchhiked up to his home-country in the Northwest, up through Portland in snow, farther up to the blue ice glacier country, finally northern Washington on the farm of a friend in the Nooksack Valley, a week in a berrypicker's splitshake cabin, and a few climbs around. The names like "Nooksack" and "Mount Baker National Forest" excited in my mind a beautiful crystal vision of snow and ice and pines in the Far North of my childhood dreams. . . . But I was standing on the very hot April road of North Carolina waiting for my first ride, which came very soon from a young high-school kid who took me to a country town called Nashville, where I broiled in the sun a half-hour till I got a ride from a taciturn but kindly naval officer who drove me clear to Greenville South Carolina. After that whole winter and early spring of incredible peace sleeping on my porch and resting in my woods, the stint of hitchhiking was harder than ever and more like hell than ever. In Greenville in fact I walked three miles in the burning sun for nothing, lost in the maze of downtown back streets, looking for a certain highway, and at one point passed a kind of forge where colored men were all black and sweaty and covered with coal and I cried "I'm suddenly in hell again!" as I felt the blast of heat.

But it began to rain on the road and few rides took me into the rainy night of Georgia, where I rested sitting on my pack under the overhanging sidewalk roofs of old hardware stores and drank a half pint of wine. A rainy night, no rides. When the Greyhound bus came I hailed it down and rode to


152

Gainesville. In Gainesville I thought I'd sleep by the railroad tracks awhile but they were about a mile away and just as I thought of sleeping in the yard a local crew came out to switch and saw me, so I retired to an empty lot by the tracks, but the cop car kept circling around using its spot (had probably heard of me from the railroad men, probably not) so I gave it up, mosquitoes anyway, and went back to town and stood waiting for a ride in the bright lights by the luncheonettes of downtown, the cops seeing me plainly and therefore not searching for me or worrying about me.

But no ride, and dawn coming, so I slept in a four-dollar room in a hotel and showered and rested well. But what feelings of homelessness and bleak, again, as the Christmas trip east. All I had to be really proud of were my fine new thick-soled workshoes and my full pack. In the morning, after breakfast in a dismal Georgia restaurant with revolving fans on the ceiling and mucho flies, I went out on the broiling highway and got a ride from a truckdriver to Flowery Branch Georgia, then a few spot rides on through Atlanta to the other side at another small town called Stonewall, where I was picked up by a big fat Southerner with a broadbrimmed hat who reeked of whisky and kept telling jokes and turning to look at me to see if I laughed, meanwhile sending the car spurting into the soft shoulders and leaving big clouds of dust behind us, so that long before he reached his destination I begged off and said I wanted to get off to eat.

"Heck, boy, I'll eat with ya 'n' drive ya on." He was drunk and he drove very fast.

"Well I gotta go to the toilet," I said trailing off my voice. The experience had bugged me so I decided, "The hell with hitchhiking. I've got enough money to take a bus to El


153

Paso and from there I'll hop Southern Pacific freights and be ten times safer." Besides the thought of being all the way out in El Paso Texas in that dry Southwest of clear blue skies and endless desert land to sleep in, no cops, made up my mind. I was anxious to get out of the South, out of chaingang Georgia.

The bus came at four o'clock and we were at Birmingham Alabama in the middle of the night, where I waited on a bench for my next bus trying to sleep on my arms on my rucksack but kept waking up to see the pale ghosts of American bus stations wandering around: in fact one woman streamed by like a wisp of smoke, I was definitely certain she didn't exist for sure. On her face the phantasmal belief in what she was doing . . . On my face, for that matter, too. After Birmingham it was soon Louisiana and then east Texas oilfields, then Dallas, then a long day's ride in a bus crowded with servicemen across the long immense waste of Texas, to the ends of it, El Paso, arriving at midnight, by now I being so exhausted all I wanted to do was sleep. But I didn't go to a hotel, I had to watch my money now, and instead I just hauled my pack to my back and walked straight for the railroad yards to stretch my bag out somewhere behind the tracks. It was then, that night, that I realized the dream that had made me want to buy the pack.

It was a beautiful night and the most beautiful sleep of my life. First I went to the yards and walked through, warily, behind lines of boxcars, and got out to the west end of the yard but kept going because suddenly I saw in the dark there was indeed a lot of desert land out there. I could see rocks, dry bushes, imminent mountains of them faintly in the starlight. "Why hang around viaducts and tracks," I reasoned, "when all


154

I gotta do is exert a little footwork and I'll be safe out of reach of all yard cops and bums too for that matter." I just kept walking along the mainline track for a few miles and soon I was in the open desert mountain country. My thick boots walked well on the ties and rocks. It was now about one a.m., I longed to sleep off the long trip from Carolina. Finally I saw a mountain to the right I liked, after passing a long valley with many lights in it distinctly a penitentiary or prison. "Stay away from that yard, son," I thought. I went up a dry arroyo and in the starlight the sand and rocks were white. I climbed and climbed.

Suddenly I was exhilarated to realize I was completely alone and safe and nobody was going to wake me up all night long. What an amazing revelation! And I had everything I needed right on my back; I'd put fresh bus-station water in my polybdenum bottle before leaving. I climbed up the arroyo, so finally when I turned and looked back I could see all of Mexico, all of Chihuahua, the entire sand-glittering desert of it, under a late sinking moon that was huge and bright just over the Chihuahua mountains. The Southern Pacific rails run right along parallel to the Rio Grande River outside of El Paso, so from where I was, on the American side, I could see right down to the river itself separating the two borders. The sand in the arroyo was soft as silk. I spread my sleeping bag on it and took off my shoes and had a slug of water and lit my pipe and crossed my legs and felt glad. Not a sound; it was still winter in the desert. Far off, just the sound of the yards where they were kicking cuts of cars with a great splowm waking up all El Paso, but not me. All I had for companionship was that moon of Chihuahua sinking lower and lower as I looked, losing its white light and getting more and more yellow butter, yet


155

when I turned in to sleep it was bright as a lamp in my face and I had to turn my face away to sleep. In keeping with my naming of little spots with personal names, I called this spot "Apache Gulch." I slept well indeed.

In the morning I discovered a rattlesnake trail in the sand but that might have been from the summer before. There were very few bootmarks, and those were hunters' boots. The sky was flawlessly blue in the morning, the sun hot, plenty of little dry wood to light a breakfast fire. I had cans of pork and beans in my spacious pack. I had a royal breakfast. The problem now was water, though, as I drank it all and the sun was hot and I got thirsty. I climbed up the arroyo investigating it further and came to the end of it, a solid wall of rock, and at the foot of it even deeper softer sand than that of the night before. I decided to camp there that night, after a pleasant day spent in old Juarez enjoying the church and streets and food of Mexico. For a while I contemplated leaving my pack hidden among rocks but the chances were slim yet possible that some old hobo or hunter would come along and find it so I hauled it on my back and went down the arroyo to the rails again and walked back three miles into El Paso and left the pack in a twenty-five-cent locker in the railroad station. Then I walked through the city and out to the border gate and crossed over for two pennies.

It turned out to be an insane day, starting sanely enough in the church of Mary Guadaloupe and a saunter in the Indian Markets and resting on park benches among the gay childlike Mexicans but later the bars and a few too many to drink, yelling at old mustachioed Mexican peons "Todas las granas de arena del desierto de Chihuahua son vacuidad!" and finally I ran into a bunch of evil Mexican Apaches of some kind who took


156

me to their dripping stone pad and turned me on by candlelight and invited their friends and it was all a lot of shadowy heads by candlelight and smoke. In fact I got sick of it and remembered my perfect white sand gulch and the place where I would sleep tonight and I excused myself. But they didn't want me to leave. One of them stole a few things from my bag of purchases but I didn't care. One of the Mexican boys was queer and had fallen in love with me and wanted to go to California with me. It was night now in Juarez; all the nightclubs were wailing away. We went for a short beer in one nightclub which was exclusively Negro soldiers sprawling around with senoritas in their laps, a mad bar, with rock and roll on the jukebox, a regular paradise. The Mexican kid wanted me to go down alleys and go "sst" and tell American boys that I knew where there were some girls. "Then I bring them to my room, sst, no gurls!" said the Mexican kid. The only place I could shake him was at the border gate. We waved goodbye. But it was the evil city and I had my virtuous desert waiting for me.

I walked anxiously over the border and through El Paso and out to the railroad station, got my bag out, heaved a big sigh, and went right on down those three miles to the arroyo, which was easy to re-recognize in the moonlight, and on up, my feet making that lonely thwap thwap of Japhy's boots and I realized I had indeed learned from Japhy how to cast off the evils of the world and the city and find my true pure soul, just as long as I had a decent pack on my back. I got back to my camp and spread the sleeping bag and thanked the Lord for all He was giving me. Now the remembrance of the whole long evil afternoon smoking marijuana with slant-hatted Mexicans in a musty candlelit room was like a dream, a bad dream,


157

like one of my dreams on the straw mat at Buddha Creek North Carolina. I meditated and prayed. There just isn't any kind of night's sleep in the world that can compare with the night's sleep you get in the desert winter night, providing you're good and warm in a duck-down bag. The silence is so intense that you can hear your own blood roar in your ears but louder than that by far is the mysterious roar which I always identify with the roaring of the diamond of wisdom, the mysterious roar of silence itself, which is a great Shhhh reminding you of something you've seemed to have forgotten in the stress of your days since birth. I wished I could explain it to those I loved, to my mother, to Japhy, but there just weren't any words to describe the nothingness and purity of it. "Is there a certain and definite teaching to be given to all living creatures?" was the question probably asked to beetlebrowed snowy Dipankara, and his answer was the roaring silence of the diamond.

23
In the morning I had to get the show on the road or never get to my protective shack in California. I had about eight dollars left of the cash I'd brought with me. I went down to the highway and started to hitchhike, hoping for quick luck. A salesman gave me a ride. He said "Three hundred and


158

sixty days out of the year we get bright sunshine here in El Paso and my wife just bought a clothes dryer!" He took me to Las Gruces New Mexico and there I walked through the little town, following the highway, and came out on the other end and saw a big beautiful old tree and decided to just lay my pack down and rest anyhow. "Since it's a dream already ended, then I'm already in California, then I've already decided to rest under that tree at noon," which I did, on my back, even napping awhile, pleasantly.

Then I got up and walked over the railroad bridge, and just then a man saw me and said "How would you like to earn two dollars an hour helping me move a piano?" I needed the money and said okay. We left my rucksack in his moving storage room and went off in his little truck, to a home in the outskirts of Las Gruces, where a lot of nice middleclass people were chatting on the porch, and the man and I got out of the truck with the handtruck and the pads and got the piano out, also a lot of other furniture, then transported it to their new house and got that in and that was that. Two hours, he gave me four dollars and I went into a truckstop diner and had a royal meal and was all set for that afternoon and night. Just then a car stopped, driven by a big Texan with a sombrero, with a poor Mexican couple, young, in the back seat, the girl carrying an infant, and he offered me a ride all the way to Los Angeles for ten dollars. I said "I'll give you all I can, which is only four." "Well goddammit come on anyway." He talked and talked and drove all night straight through Arizona and the California desert and left me off in Los Angeles a stone's throw from my railroad yards at nine o'clock in the morning, and the only disaster was the poor little Mexican wife had spilled


159

some baby food on my rucksack on the floor of the car and I wiped it off angrily. But they had been nice people. In fact, driving through Arizona I'd explained a little Buddhism to them, specifically karma, reincarnation, and they all seemed pleased to hear the news.

"You mean other chance to come back and try again?" asked the poor little Mexican, who was all bandaged from a fight in Juarez the night before.

"That's what they say."

"Well goddammit next time I be born I hope I ain't who I am now."

And the big Texan, if anybody better get another chance it was him: his stories all night long were about how he slugged so-and-so for such-and-such, from what he said he had knocked enough men out to form Coxie's army of avenged phantasmal grievers crawling on to Texas-land. But I noticed he was more of a big fibber than anything else and didn't believe half his stories and stopped listening at midnight. Now, nine a.m. in L.A., I walked to the railroad yards, had a cheap breakfast of doughnuts and coffee in a bar sitting at the counter chatting with the Italian bartender who wanted to know what I was doing with the big rucksack, then I went to the yards and sat in the grass watching them make up the trains.

Proud of myself because I used to be a brakeman I made the mistake of wandering around the yards with my rucksack on my back chatting with the switchmen, asking about the next local, and suddenly here came a great big young cop with a gun swinging in a holster on his hip, all done up like on TV the Sheriff of Cochise and Wyatt Earp, and giving me a steely look through dark glasses orders me out of the yards. So he


l60

watches me as I go over the overpass to the highway, standing there arms akimbo. Mad, I went back down the highway and jumped over the railroad fence and lay flat in the grass awhile. Then I sat up and chewed grass, keeping low however, and waited. Soon I heard a highball blow and I knew what train was ready and I climbed over cars to my train and jumped on it as it was pulling out and rode right out of the L.A. yards lying on my back with a grass stem in my mouth right under the unforgiving gaze of my policeman, who was now arms akimbo for a different reason. In fact he scratched his Head.

The local went to Santa Barbara where again I went to the beach, had a swim and some food over a fine woodfire in the sand, and came back to the yards with plenty of time to catch the  Midnight Ghost. The Midnight Ghost is composed mainly of flatcars with truck trailers lashed on them by steel cables. The huge wheels of the trucks are encased in woodblocks. Since I always lay my head down right by those woodblocks, it would be goodbye Ray if there ever was a crash. I figured if it was my destiny to die on the Midnight Ghost it was my destiny. I figured God had work for me to do yet. The Ghost came right on schedule and I got on a flatcar, under a truck, spread out my bag, stuck my shoes under my balled coat for a pillow, and relaxed and sighed. Zoom, we were gone. And now I know why the bums call it the Midnight Ghost, because, exhausted, against all better judgment, I fell fast asleep and only woke up under the glare of the yard office lights in San Luis Obispo, a very dangerous situation, the train had stopped just in the wrong way. But there wasn't a soul in sight around the yard office, it was mid of night, besides just then, as I woke up from a perfect dreamless sleep the highball was going baugh baugh up front and we were already pulling


161

out, exactly like ghosts. And I didn't wake up then till almost San Francisco in the morning. I had a dollar left and Gary was waiting for me at the shack. The whole trip had been as swift and enlightening as a dream, and I was back.

24
If the Dharma Bums ever get lay brothers in America who live normal lives with wives and children and homes, they will be like Sean Monahan.

Sean was a young carpenter who lived in an old wooden house far up a country road from the huddled cottages of Corte Madera, drove an old jalopy, personally added a porch to the back of the house to make a nursery for later children, and had selected a wife who agreed with him in every detail about how to live the joyous life in America without much money. Sean liked to take days off from his job to just go up the hill to the shack, which belonged to the property he rented, and spend a day of meditation and study of the Buddhist sutras and just brewing himself pots of tea and taking naps. His wife was Christine, a beautiful young honey-haired girl, her hair falling way down over her shoulders, who wandered around the house and yard barefooted hanging up wash and baking her own brown bread and cookies. She was an expert on making food out of nothing. The year before Japhy had made them an


l62

anniversary gift which was a huge ten-pound bag of flour, and they were very glad to receive it. Sean in fact was just an old-time patriarch; though he was only twenty-two he wore a full beard like Saint Joseph and in it you could see his pearly white teeth smiling and his young blue eyes twinkling. They already had two little daughters, who also wandered around barefooted in the house and yard and were brought up to take care of themselves. Sean's house had woven straw mats on the floor and there too when you came in you were required to take off your shoes. He had lots of books and the only extravagance was a hi-fi set so he could play his fine collection of Indian records and Flamenco records and jazz. He even had Chinese and Japanese records. The dining table was a low, black-lacquered, Japanese style table, and to eat in Sean's house you not only had to be in your socks but sitting on mats at this table, any way you could. Christine was a great one for delicious soups and fresh biscuits.

When I arrived there at noon that day, getting off the Greyhound bus and walking up the tar road about a mile, Christine immediately had me sit down to hot soup and hot bread with butter. She was a gentle creature. "Sean and Japhy are both working on his job at Sausalito. They'll be home about five."

"I'll go up to the shack and look at it and wait up there this afternoon."

"Well, you can stay down here and play records." "Well, I'll get out of your way."

"You won't be in my way, all I'm gonna do is hang out the wash and bake some bread for tonight and mend a few things." With a wife like that Sean, working only desultorily at carpentry, had managed to put a few thousand dollars in the


163

bank. And like a patriarch of old Sean was generous, he always insisted on feeding you and if twelve people were in the house he'd lay out a big dinner (a simple dinner but delicious) on a board outside in the yard, and always a big jug of red wine. It was a communal arrangement, though, he was strict about that: we'd make collections for the wine, and if people came, as they all did, for a long weekend, they were expected to bring food or food money. Then at night under the trees and the stars of his yard, with everybody well fed and drinking red wine, Sean would take out his guitar and sing folksongs. Whenever I got tired of it I'd climb my hill and go sleep.       After eating lunch and talking awhile to Christine, I went up the hill. It climbed steeply right at the back door. Huge ponderosas and other pines, and in the property adjoining Sean's a dreamy horse meadow with wild flowers and two beautiful bays with their sleek necks bent to the butterfat grass in the hot sun. "Boy, this is going to be greater than North Carolina woods!" I thought, starting up. In the slope of grass was where Sean and Japhy had felled three huge eucalyptus trees and had already bucked them (sawed whole logs) with a chain saw. Now the block was set and I could see where they had begun to split the logs with wedges and sledgehammers and doublebitted axes. The little trail up the hill went so steeply that you almost had to lean over and walk like a monkey. It followed a long cypress row that had been planted by the old man who had died on the hill a few years ago. This prevented the cold foggy winds from the ocean from blasting across the property unhindered. There were three stages to the climb: Sean's backyard; then a fence, forming a little pure deer park where I actually saw deer one night, five of them, resting (the whole area was a game refuge); then the final


164

fence and the top grassy hill with its sudden hollow on the right where the shack was barely visible under trees and flowery bushes. Behind the shack, a well-built affair actually of three big rooms but only one room occupied by Japhy, was plenty of good firewood and a saw horse and axes and an outdoor privy with no roof, just a hole in the ground and a board. It was like the first morning in the world in fine yard, with the sun streaming in through the dense sea of leaves, and birds and butterflies jumping around, warm, sweet, the smell of higher-hill heathers and flowers beyond the barbed-wire fence which led to the very top of the mountain and showed you a vista of all the Marin County area. I went inside the shack.

On the door was a board with Chinese inscriptions on it; I never did find out what it meant: probably "Mara stay away" (Mara the Tempter). Inside I saw the beautiful simplicity of Japhy's way of living, neat, sensible, strangely rich without a cent having been spent on the decoration. Old clay jars exploded with bouquets of flowers picked around the yard. His books were neatly stacked in orange crates. The floor was covered with inexpensive straw mats. The walls, as I say, were lined with burlap, which is one of the finest wallpapers you can have, very attractive and nice smelling. Japhy's mat was covered with a thin mattress and a Paisley shawl over that, and at the head of it, neatly rolled for the day, his sleeping bag. Behind burlap drapes in a closet his rucksack and junk were put away from sight. From the burlap wall hung beautiful prints of old Chinese silk paintings and maps of Marin County and northwest Washington and various poems he'd written and just stuck on a nail for anybody to read. The latest poem superimposed over others on the nail said: "It


165

started just now with a hummingbird stopping over the porch two yards away through the open door, then gone, it stopped me studying and I saw the old redwood post leaning in clod ground, tangled in a huge bush of yellow flowers higher than my head, through which I push every time I come inside. The shadow network of the sunshine through its vines. White-crowned sparrows make tremendous singings in the trees, the rooster down the valley crows and crows. Sean Monahan outside, behind my back, reads the Diamond Sutra in the sun. Yesterday I read Migration of Birds. The Golden Plover and the Arctic Tern, today that big abstraction's at my door, for juncoes and the robins soon will leave, and nesting scrabblers will pick up all the string, and soon in hazy day of April summer heat across the hill, without a book I'll know, the seabirds'll chase spring north along the coast: they'll be nesting in Alaska in six weeks." And it was signed: "Japheth M. Ryder, Cypress-Cabin, 18:III: 56."

I didn't want to disturb anything in the house till he got back from work so I went out and lay down in the tall green grass in the sun and waited all afternoon, dreaming. But then I realized, "I might as well make a nice supper for Japhy" and I went down the hill again and down the road to the store and bought beans, saltpork, various groceries and came back and lit a fire in the woodstove and boiled up a good pot of New England beans, with molasses and onions. I was amazed at the way Japhy stored his food: just on a shelf by the woodstove: two onions, an orange, a bag of wheat germ, cans of curry powder, rice, mysterious pieces of dried Chinese seaweed, a bottle of soy sauce (to make his mysterious Chinese dishes). His salt and pepper was all neatly wrapped up in little plastic wrappers bound with elastic. There wasn't any-


166

thing in the world Japhy would ever waste, or lose. Now I was introducing into his kitchen all the big substantial pork-and-beans of the world, maybe he wouldn't like it. He also had a big chunk of Christine's fine brown bread, and his bread knife was a dagger simply stuck into the board.

It got dark and I waited in the yard, letting the pot of beans keep warm on the fire. I chopped some wood and added it to the pile behind the stove. The fog began to blow in from the Pacific, the trees bowed deeply and roared. From the top of the hill you could see nothing but trees, trees, a roaring sea of trees. It was paradise. As it got cold I went inside and stoked up the fire, singing, and closed the windows. The windows were simply removable opaque plastic pieces that had been cleverly carpentered by Whitey Jones, Christine's brother, they let in light but you couldn't see anything outdoors and they cut off the cold wind. Soon it was warm in the cozy cabin. By and by I heard a "Hoo" out in the roaring sea of fog trees and it was Japhy coming back.

I went out to greet him. He was coming across the tall final grass, weary from the day's work, clomping along in his boots, his coat over his back. "Well, Smith, here you are."

"I cooked up a nice pot of beans for you."

"You did?" He was tremendously grateful. "Boy, what a relief to come home from work and don't have to cook up a meal yourself. I'm starved." He pitched right into the beans with bread and hot coffee I made in a pan on the stove, just French style brewing coffee stirred with a spoon. We had a great supper and then lit up our pipes and talked with the fire roaring. "Ray, you're going to have a great summer up on that Desolation Peak. I'll tell you all about it."

"I'm gonna have a great spring right here in this shack."


 167

"Durn right, first thing we do this weekend is invite some nice new girls I know, Psyche and Polly Whitmore, though wait a minute, hmm. I can't invite both of them they both love me and'll be jealous. Anyway we'll have big parties every weekend, starting downstairs at Sean's and ending up here. And I'm not workin tomorrow so we'll cut some firewood for Sean. That's all he wants you to do. Though, if you wanta work on that job of ours in Sausalito next week, you can make ten bucks a day."

"Fine . . . that'll buy a lotta pork and beans and wine."

Japhy pulled out a fine brush drawing of a mountain. "Here's your mountain that'll loom over you, Hozomeen. I drew it myself two summers ago from Crater Peak. In nineteen-fifty-two I first went into that Skagit country, hitched from Frisco to Seattle and then in, with a beard just started and a bare shaved head"

"Bare shaved head! Why?"

"To be like a bhikku, you know what it says in the sutras."

"But what did people think about you hitchhiking around with a bare shaved head?"

"They thought I was crazy, but everybody that gave me a ride I'd spin 'em the Dharmy, boy, and leave 'em enlightened."

"I shoulda done a bit of that myself hitchin out here just now. ... I gotta tell you about my arroyo in the desert mountains."

"Wait a minute, so they put me on Crater Mountain lookout but the snow was so deep in the high country that year I worked trail for a month first in Granite Creek gorge, you'll see all those places, and then with a string of mules we made it the final seven miles of winding Tibetan rocktrail above timber line over snowfields to the final jagged pinnacles, and then


168

climbed the cliffs in a snowstorm and I opened my cabin and cooked my first dinner while the wind howled and the ice grew on two walls in the wind. Boy, wait'll you get up there. That year my friend Jack Joseph was on Desolation, where you'll be."

"What a name, Desolation, oo, wow, ugh, wait . . ."

"He was the first lookout to go up, I got him on my radio first off and he welcomed me to the community of lookouts. Later I contacted other mountains, see they give you a two-way radio, it's almost a ritual all the lookouts chat and talk about bears they've seen or sometimes ask instructions for how to bake muffins on a woodstove and so on, and there we all were in a high world talking on a net of wireless across hundreds of miles of wilderness. It's a primitive area, where you're going boy. From my cabin I could see the lamps of Desolation after dark, Jack Joseph reading his geology books and in the day we flashed by mirror to align our firefinder transits, accurate to the compass."

"Gee, how'll I ever learn all that, I'm just a simple poet bum."

"Oh you'll learn, the magnetic pole, the pole star and the northern lights. Every night Jack Joseph and I talked: one day he got a swarm of ladybugs on the lookout that covered the roof and filled up his water cistern, another day he went for a walk along the ridge and stepped right on a sleeping bear."

"Oho, I thought this place was wild."

"This is nothin . . . and when the lightning storm came by, closer and closer, he called to finally say he was going off the air because the storm was too close to leave his radio on, he disappeared from sound and then sight as the black clouds


 169

swept over and the lightning danced on his hill. But as the summer passed Desolation got dry and flowery and Blakey lambs and he wandered the cliffs and I was on Crater Mountain in my jockstrap and boots hunting out ptarmigan nests out of curiosity, climbing and pooking about, gettin bit by bees. . . . Desolation's way up there, Ray, six thousand feet or so up looking into Canada and the Chelan highlands, the wilds of the Pickett range, and mountains like Challenger, Terror, Fury, Despair and the name of your own ridge is Starvation Ridge and the upcountry of the Boston Peak and Buckner Peak range to the south thousands of miles of mountains, deer, bear, conies, hawks, trout, chipmunks. It'll be great for you Ray." "I look forward to it okay. I bet no bee bites me." Then he took out his books and read awhile, and I read too, both of us with separate oil lamps banked low, a quiet evening at home as the foggy wind roared in the trees outside and across the valley a mournful mule heehawed in one of the most tremendously heartbroken cries I've ever heard. "When that mule weeps like that," says Japhy, "I feel like praying for all sentient beings." Then for a while he meditated motionless in the full lotus position on his mat and then said "Well, time for bed." But now I wanted to tell him all the things I'd discovered that winter meditating in the woods. "Ah, it's just a lot of words," he said, sadly, surprising me. "I don't wanta hear all your word descriptions of words words words you made up all winter, man I wanta be enlightened by actions." Japhy had changed since the year before, too. He no longer had his goatee, which had removed the funny merry little look of his face but left him looking gaunt and rocky faced. Also he'd cut his hair in a close crew cut and looked Germanic and stern and above all sad. There seemed to be some kind of


I70

disappointment in his face now, and certainly in his soul, he wouldn't listen to my eager explanations that everything was all right forever and forever and forever. Suddenly he said "I'm gonna get married, soon, I think, I'm gettin tired of battin around like this."

"But I thought you'd discovered the Zen ideal of poverty and freedom."

"Aw maybe I'm gettin tired of all that. After I come back from the monastery in Japan I'll probably have my fill of it anyhow. Maybe I'll be rich and work and make a lot of money and live in a big house." But a minute later: "And who wants to enslave himself to a lot of all that, though? I dunno, Smith, I'm just depressed and everything you're saying just depresses me further. My sister's back in town you know."

"Who's that?"

"That's Rhoda, my sister, I grew up with her in the woods in Oregon. She's gonna marry this rich jerk from Chicago, a real square. My father's having trouble with his sister, too, my Aunt Noss. She's an old bitch from way back."

"You shouldn't have cut off your goatee, you used to look like a happy little sage."

"Well I ain't happy little sage no mo' and I'm tired." He was exhausted from a long hard day's work. We decided to go to sleep and forget it. In fact we were a bit sad and sore at each other. During the day I had discovered a spot by a wild rosebush in the yard where I planned to lay out my sleeping bag. I'd covered it a foot deep with fresh pulled grass. Now, with my flashlight and my bottle of cold water from the sink tap, I went out there and rolled into a beautiful night's rest under the sighing trees, meditating awhile first. I couldn't meditate indoors any more like Japhy had just done, after all that winter


171

in the woods of night I had to hear the little sounds of animals and birds and feel the cold sighing earth under me before I could rightly get to feel a kinship with all living things as being empty and awake and saved already. I prayed for Japhy: it

looked like he was changing for the worse. At dawn a little fain pattered on my sleeping bag and I put my poncho over me instead of under me, cursing, and slept on. At seven in the morning the sun was out and the butterflies were in the roses

by my head and a hummingbird did a jet dive right down at me, whistling, and darted away happily. But I was mistaken about Japhy changing. It was one of the greatest mornings in our lives. There he was standing in the doorway of the shack with a big frying pan in his hand banging on it and chanting "Buddham saranam gocchami . . . Dhammam saranam gocchami . . . Sangham saranam gocchami" and yelling "Come on, boy, your pancakes are ready! Come and get it! Bang bang bang" and the orange sun was pouring in through the pines and everything was fine again, in fact Japhy had contemplated that night and decided I was right about hewing to the good old Dharma.

25
Japhy had cooked up some good buckwheat pancakes and we had Log Cabin syrup to go with them and a little butter. I asked him what the "Gocchami" chant meant. "That's


172

the chant they give out for the three meals in Buddhist monasteries in Japan. It means, Buddham Saranam Gocchami, I take refuge in the Buddha, Sangham, I take refuge in the church, Dhammam, I take refuge in the Dharma, the truth. Tomorrow morning I'll make you another nice breakfast, slum-gullion, d'yever eat good oldfashioned slumgullion boy, 'taint nothin but scrambled eggs and potatoes all scrambled up together."

"It's a lumberjack meal?"

"There ain't no such thing as lumberjack, that must be a Back East expression. Up here we call 'em loggers. Come on eat up your pancakes and we'll go down and split logs and I'll show you how to handle a doublebitted ax." He took the ax out and sharpened it and showed me how to sharpen it. "And don't ever use this ax on a piece of wood that's on the ground, you'll hit rocks and blunt it, always have a log or sumpthin for a block."

I went out to the privy and, coming back, wishing to surprise Japhy with a Zen trick I threw the roll of toilet paper through the open window and he let out a big Samurai Warrior roar and appeared on the windowsill in his boots and shorts with a dagger in his hand and jumped fifteen feet down into the loggy yard. It was crazy. We started downhill feeling high. All the logs that had been bucked had more or less of a crack in them, where you more or less inserted the heavy iron wedge, and then, raising a five-pound sledgehammer over your head, standing way back so's not to hit your own ankle, you brought it down konko on the wedge and split the log clean in half. Then you'd sit the half-logs up on a block-log and let down with the doublebitted ax, a long beautiful ax, sharp as a razor, and fawap, you had quarter-logs. Then you set up a


173

quarter-log and brought down to an eighth. He showed me how to swing the sledge and the ax, not too hard, but when he got mad himself I noticed he swung the ax as hard as he could, roaring his famous cry, or cursing. Pretty soon I had the knack and was going along as though I'd been doing it all my life.

Christine came out in the yard to watch us and called "I'll have some nice lunch for ya."

"Okay." Japhy and Christine were like brother and sister.

We split a lot of logs. It was great swinging down the sledgehammer, all the weight clank on top of a wedge and feeling that log give, if not the first time the second time. The smell of sawdust, pine trees, the breeze blowing over the  placid mountains from the sea, the meadowlarks singing, the butterflies in the grass, it was perfect. Then we went in and ate a good lunch of hotdogs and rice and soup and red wine and Christine's fresh biscuits and sat there crosslegged and barefoot thumbing through Sean's vast library.

"Did ya hear about the disciple who asked the Zen master 'What is the Buddha?' "

"No, what?"

" 'The Buddha is a dried piece of turd,' was the answer. The disciple experienced sudden enlightenment."

"Simple shit," I said.

"Do you know what sudden enlightenment is? One disciple came to a Master and answered his koan and the Master hit him with a stick and knocked him off the veranda ten feet into a mud puddle. The disciple got up and laughed. He later became a Master himself. 'Twasn't by words he was enlightened, but by that great healthy push off the porch."

"All wallowing in mud to prove the crystal truth of com-


174

passion," I thought, I wasn't about to start advertising my "words" out loud any more to Japhy.

"Woo!" he yelled throwing a flower at my head. "Do you know how Kasyapa became the First Patriarch? The Buddha was about to start expounding a sutra and twelve hundred and fifty bhikkus were waiting with their garments arranged and their feet crossed, and all the Buddha did was raise a flower. Everybody was perturbed. The Buddha didn't say nothin. Only Kasyapa smiled. That was how the Buddha selected Kasyapa. That's known as the flower sermon, boy."

I went in the kitchen and got a banana and came out and said, "Well, I'll tell you what nirvana is."

"What?"

I ate the banana and threw the peel away and said nothing. "That's the banana sermon."

"Hoo!" yelled Japhy. "D'l ever tell you about Coyote Old Man and how him and Silver Fox started the world by stomping in empty space till a little ground appeared beneath their feet? Look at this picture, by the way. This is the famous Bulls." It was an ancient Chinese cartoon showing first a young boy going out into the wilderness with a small staff and pack, like an American Nat Wills tramp of 1905, and in later panels he discovers an ox, tries to tame, tries to ride it, finally does tame it and ride it but then abandons the ox and just sits in the moonlight meditating, finally you see him coming down from the mountain of enlightenment and then suddenly the next panel shows absolutely nothing at all, followed by a panel showing blossoms in a tree, then the last picture you see the young boy is a big fat old laughing wizard with a huge bag on his back and he's going into the city to get drunk


175

with the butchers, enlightened, and another new young boy is going up to the mountain with a little pack and staff.

"It goes on and on, the disciples and the Masters go through the same thing, first they have to find and tame the ox of their mind essence, and then abandon that, then finally they attain to nothing, as represented by this empty panel, then having attained nothing they attain everything which is springtime blossoms in the trees so they end up coming down to the city to get drunk with the butchers like Li Po." That was a very wise cartoon, it reminded me of my own experience, trying to tame my mind in the woods, then realizing it was all empty and awake and I didn't have to do anything, and now I was getting drunk with the butcher Japhy. We played records and lounged around smoking then went out and cut more wood.

Then as it got cool late afternoon we went up to the shack and washed and dressed up for the big Saturday night party. During the day Japhy went up and down the hill at least ten times to make phone calls and see Christine and get bread and bring up sheets for his girl that night (when he had a girl he put out clean sheets on his thin mattress on the straw mats, a ritual). But I just sat around in the grass doing nothing, or writing haikus, or watching the old vulture circling the hill. "Must be something dead around here," I figured.

Japhy said "Why do you sit on your ass all day?"

"I practice do-nothing."

"What's the difference? Burn it, my Buddhism is activity," said Japhy rushing off down the hill again. Then I could hear him sawing wood and whistling in the distance. He couldn't stop jiggling for a minute. His meditations were regular


176

things, by the clock, he'd meditated first thing waking in the morning then he had his mid-afternoon meditation, only about three minutes long, then before going to bed and that was that. But I just ambled and dreamed around. We were two strange dissimilar monks on the same path. I took a shovel, however, and leveled the ground near the rosebush where my bed of grass was: it was a little too slanty for comfort: I fixed it just right and that night I slept well after the big wine party.

The big party was wild. Japhy had a girl called Polly Whit-more come out to see him, a beautiful brunette with a Spanish hairdo and dark eyes, a regular raving beauty actually, a mountainclimber too. She'd just been divorced and lived alone in Millbrae. And Christine's brother Whitey Jones brought his fiancee Patsy. And of course Sean came home from work and cleaned up for the party. Another guy came out for the weekend, big blond Bud Diefendorf who worked as the janitor in the Buddhist Association to earn his rent and attend classes free, a big mild pipesmoking Buddha with all kinds of strange ideas. I liked Bud, he was intelligent, and I liked the fact that he had started out as a physicist at the University of Chicago then gone from that to philosophy and finally now to philosophy's dreadful murderer, Buddha. He said "I had a dream one time that I was sitting under a tree picking on a lute and singing 'I ain't got no name.' I was the no-name bhikku." It was so pleasing to meet so many Buddhists after that harsh road hitchhiking.

Sean was a strange mystical Buddhist with a mind full of superstitions and premonitions. "I believe in devils," he said.

"Well," I said, stroking his little daughter's hair, "all little children know that everybody goes to Heaven" to which he


 177

assented tenderly with a sad nod of his bearded skull. He was very kind. He kept saying "Aye" all the time, which went with his old boat that was anchored out in the bay and kept being scuttled by storms and we had to row out and bail it out in the cold gray fog. Just a little old wreck of a boat about twelve feet long, with no cabin to speak of, nothing but a ragged hull floating in the water around a rusty anchor. Whitey Jones, Christine's brother, was a sweet young kid of twenty who never said anything and just smiled and took ribbings without complaint. For instance the party finally got pretty wild and the three couples took all their clothes off and danced a kind of quaint innocent polka all hand-in-hand around the parlor, as the kiddies slept in their cribs. This didn't disturb Bud and me at all, we went right on smoking our pipes and discussing Buddhism in the corner, in fact that was best because we didn't have girls of our own. And those were three well stacked nymphs dancing there. But Japhy and Sean dragged Patsy into the bedroom and pretended to be trying to make her, to bug Whitey, who blushed all red, stark naked, and there were wrestlings and laughs all around the house. Bud and I were sitting there crosslegged with naked dancing girls in front of us and laughed to realize that it was a mighty familiar occasion.

"Seems like in some previous lifetime, Ray," said Bud, "you and I were monks in some monastery in Tibet where the girls danced for us before yabyum."

"Yeh, and we were the old monks who weren't interested in sex any more but Sean and Japhy and Whitey were the young monks and were still full of the fire of evil and still had a lot to learn." Every now and then Bud and I looked at all that flesh and licked our lips in secret. But most of the time,


178

actually, during these naked revels, I just kept my eyes closed and listened to the music: I was really sincerely keeping lust out of my mind by main force and gritting of my teeth. And the best way was to keep my eyes closed. In spite of the nakedness and all it was really a gentle little home party and everybody began yawning for time for bed. Whitey went off with Patsy, Japhy went up the hill with Polly and took her to his fresh sheets, and I unrolled my sleeping bag by the rosebush and slept. Bud had brought his own sleeping bag and rolled out on Sean's straw mat floor.

In the morning Bud came up and lit his pipe and sat in the grass chatting to me as I rubbed my eyes to waking. During the day, Sunday, all kinds of other people came calling on the Monahans and half of them came up the hill to see the pretty shack and the two crazy famous bhikkus Japhy and Ray. Among them were Princess, Alvah, and Warren Coughlin. Sean spread out a board in the yard and put out a royal table of wine and hamburgers and pickles and lit a big bonfire and took out his two guitars and it was really a magnificent kind of way to live in Sunny California, I realized, with all this fine Dharma connected with it, and mountainclimbing, all of them had rucksacks and sleeping bags and some of them were going hiking that next day on the Marin County trails, which are beautiful. So the party was divided into three parts all the time: those in the living room listening to the hi-fi or thumbing through books, those in the yard eating and listening to the guitar music, and those on the hilltop in the shack brewing pots of tea and sitting crosslegged discussing poetry and things and the Dharma or wandering around in the high meadow to go see the children fly kites or old ladies ride by on horseback. Every weekend was the same mild picnic,


 179

a regular classical scene of angels and dolls having a kind flowery time in the void like the void in the cartoon of the Bulls, the blossom branch.

Bud and I sat on the hill watching kites. "That kite won't go high enough, it hasn't got a long enough tail," I said.

Bud said, "Say, that's great, that reminds me of my main problem in my meditations. The reason why I can't get really high into nirvana is because my tail isn't long enough." He puffed and pondered seriously over this. He was the most serious guy in the world. He pondered it all night and the next morning said "Last night I saw myself as a fish swimming through the void of the sea, going left and right in the water without knowing the meaning of left and right, but because of my fin I did so, that is, my kite tail, so I'm a Buddhafish and my fin is my wisdom."

"That was pretty infinyte, that kyte," says I.

Throughout all these parties I always stole off for a nap under the eucalyptus trees, instead of by my rosebush, which was all hot sun all day; in the shade of the trees I rested well. One afternoon as I just gazed at the topmost branches of those immensely tall trees I began to notice that the uppermost twigs and leaves were lyrical happy dancers glad that they had been apportioned the top, with all that rumbling experience of the whole tree swaying beneath them making their dance, their every jiggle, a huge and communal and mysterious necessity dance, and so just floating up there in the void dancing the meaning of the tree. I noticed how the leaves almost looked human the way they bowed and then leaped up and then swayed lyrically side to side. It was a crazy vision in my mind but beautiful. Another time under those trees I dreamt I saw a purple throne all covered with gold, some kind


l80    

of Eternity Pope or Patriarch in it, and Rosie somewhere, and at that moment Cody was in the shack yakking to some guys and it seemed that he was to the left of this vision as some kind of Archangel, and when I opened my eyes I saw it was only the sun against my eyelids. And as I say, that hummingbird, a beautiful little blue hummingbird no bigger than a dragonfly, kept making a whistling jet dive at me, definitely saying hello to me, every day, usually in the morning, and I always yelled back at him a greeting. Finally he began to hover in the open window of the shack, buzzing there with his furious wings, looking at me beadily, then, flash, he was gone. That California humming guy . . .

Though sometimes I was afraid he would drive right into my head with his long beaker like a hatpin. There was also an old rat scrambling in the cellar under the shack and it was a good thing to keep the door closed at night. My other great friends were the ants, a colony of them that wanted to come in the shack and find the honey ("Calling all ants, calling all ants, come and get your ho-ney!" sang a little boy one day in the shack), so I went out to their anthill and made a trail of honey leading them into the back garden, and they were at that new vein of joy for a week. I even got down on my knees and talked to the ants. There were beautiful flowers all around the shack, red, purple, pink, white, we kept making bouquets but the prettiest of all was the one Japhy made of just pine cones and a sprig of pine needles. It had that simple look that characterized all his life. He'd come barging into the shack with his saw and see me sitting there and say "Why did you sit around all day?"

"I am the Buddha known as the Quitter."

Then it would be when Japhy's face would crease up in that


  l8l

funny littleboy laugh of his, like a Chinese boy laughing, crow's tracks appearing on each side of his eyes and his long mouth cracking open. He was so pleased with me sometimes.

Everybody loved Japhy, the girls Polly and Princess and even married Christine were all madly in love with him and they were all secretly jealous of Japhy's favorite doll Psyche, who came the following weekend real cute in jeans and a little white collar falling over her black turtleneck sweater and a tender little body and face. Japhy had told me he was a bit in love with her himself. But he had a hard time convincing her to make love he had to get her drunk, once she got drinking she couldn't stop. That weekend she came Japhy made slumgullion for all the three of us in the shack then we borrowed Sean's jalopy and drove about a hundred miles up the seacoast to an isolated beach where we picked mussels right off the washed rocks of the sea and smoked them in a big woodfire covered with seaweed. We had wine and bread and cheese and Psyche spent the whole day lying on her stomach in her jeans and sweater, saying nothing. But once she looked up with her little blue eyes and said "How oral you are, Smith, you're always eating and drinking."

"I am Buddha Empty-Eat," I said.

"Ain't she cute?" said Japhy.

"Psyche," I said, "this world is the movie of what everything is, it is one movie, made of the same stuff throughout, belonging to nobody, which is what everything is."

"Ah boloney."

We ran around the beach. At one point Japhy and Psyche were hiking up ahead on the beach and I was walking alone whistling Stan Getz's "Stella" and a couple of beautiful girls up front with their boyfriends heard me and one girl turned


182

and said "Swing." There were natural caves on that beach where Japhy had once brought big parties of people and had organized naked bonfire dances.

Then the weekdays would come again and the parties were over and Japhy and I would sweep out the shack, wee dried bums dusting small temples. I still had a little left of my grant from last fall, in traveler's checks, and I took one and went to the supermarket down on the highway and bought flour, oatmeal, sugar, molasses, honey, salt, pepper, onions, rice, dried milk, bread, beans, black-eyed peas, potatoes, carrots, cabbage, lettuce, coffee, big wood matches for our woodstove and came staggering back up the hill with all that and a half-gallon of red port. Japhy's neat little spare foodshelf was suddenly loaded with too much food. "What we gonna do with all this? We'll have to feed all the bhikkus." In due time we had more bhikkus than we could handle: poor drunken Joe Ma-honey, a friend of mine from the year before, would come out and sleep for three days and recuperate for another crack at North Beach and The Place. I'd bring him his breakfast in bed. On weekends sometimes there'd be twelve guys in the shack all arguing and yakking and I'd take some yellow corn meal and mix it with chopped onions and salt and water and pour out little johnnycake tablespoons in the hot frying pan (with oil) and provide the whole gang with delicious hots to go with their tea. In the Chinese Book of Changes a year ago I had tossed a couple of pennies to see what the prediction of my fortune was and it had come out, "You will feed others." In fact I was always standing over a hot stove.

"What does it mean that those trees and mountains out there are not magic but real?" I'd yell, pointing outdoors.

"What? "they'd say.


 183

"It means that those trees and mountains out there are not magic but real."

"Yeah?"

Then I'd say, "What does it mean that those trees and mountains aren't real at all, just magic?"

"Oh come on."

"It means that those trees and mountains aren't real at all, just magic."

"Well which is it, goddammit!"

"What does it mean that you ask, well which is it goddammit?" I yelled.

"Well what?"

"It means that you ask well which is it goddammit."

"Oh go bury your head in your sleeping bag, bring me a cup of that hot coffee." I was always boiling big pots of coffee on the stove.

"Oh cut it out," yelled Warren Coughlin. "The chariot will wear down!"

One afternoon I was sitting with some children in the grass and they asked me "Why is the sky blue?"

"Because the sky is blue."

"I wanta know why the sky is blue."

"The sky is blue because you wanta know why the sky is blue."

"Blue blue you," they said.

There were also some little kids who came around throwing rocks on our shack roof, thinking it was abandoned. One afternoon, at the time when Japhy and I had a little jet-black cat, they came sneaking to the door to look in. Just as they were about to open the door I opened it, with the black cat in my arms, and said in a low voice "I am the ghost."


184

They gulped and looked at me and believed me and said "Yeah." Pretty soon they were over the other side of the hill. They never came around throwing rocks again. They thought I was a witch for sure.

26
Plans were being made for Japhy's big farewell party a few days before his boat sailed for Japan. He was scheduled to leave on a Japanese freighter. It was going to be the biggest party of all time, spilling out of Sean's hi-fi living room right out into the bonfire yard and up the hill and even over it. Japhy and I had had our fill of parties and were not looking forward to it too happily. But everybody was going to be there: all his girls, including Psyche, and the poet Ca-coethes, and Coughlin, and Alvah, and Princess and her new boyfriend, and even the director of the Buddhist Association Arthur Whane and his wife and sons, and even Japhy's father, and of course Bud, and unspecified couples from everywhere who would come with wine and food and guitars. Japhy said "I'm gettin sick and tired of these parties. How about you and me taking off for the Marin trails after the party, it'll go on for days, we'll just bring our packs and take off for Potrero Meadows camp or Laurel Dell." "Good."


  185

Meanwhile, suddenly one afternoon Japhy's sister Rhoda appeared on the scene with her fiance. She was going to be married in Japhy's father's house in Mill Valley, big reception and all. Japhy and I were sitting around in the shack in a drowsy afternoon and suddenly she was in the door, slim and blond and pretty, with her well-dressed Chicago fiance, a very handsome man. "Hoo!" yelled Japhy jumping up and kissing her in a big passionate embrace, which she returned wholeheartedly. And the way they talked!

"Well is your husband gonna be a good bang?"

"He damn well is, I picked him out real careful, ya grunge-jumper!"

"He'd better be or you'll have to call on me!"

Then to show off Japhy started a woodfire and said "Here's what we do up in that real country up north," and dumped too much kerosene into the fire but ran away from the stove and waited like a mischievous little boy and broom! the stove let out a deep rumbling explosion way inside that I could feel the shock of clear across the room. He'd almost done it that time. Then he said to her poor fiance "Well you know any good positions for honeymoon night?" The poor guy had just come back from being a serviceman in Burma and tried to talk about Burma but couldn't get a word in edgewise. Japhy was mad as hell and really jealous. He was invited to the fancy reception and he said "Can I show up nekkid?"

"Anything you want, but come."

"I can just see it now, the punchbowl and all the ladies in their lawn hats and the hi-fi playing hearts and flowers organ music and everybody wipin their eyes cause the bride is so beautiful. What you wanta get all involved in the middle class for, Rhoda?"


186

She said "Ah I don't care, I wanta start living." Her fiance had a lot of money. Actually he was a nice guy and I felt sorry for him having to smile through all this.

After they left Japhy said "She won't stay with him more than six months. Rhoda's a real mad girl, she'd rather put on jeans and go hiking than sit around Chicago apartments."

"You love her, don't you?"

"You damn right, I oughta marry her myself."

"But she's your sister."

"I don't give a goddamn. She needs a real man like me. You don't know how wild she is, you weren't brought up with her in the woods." Rhoda was real nice and I wished she hadn't shown up with a fiance. In all this welter of women I still hadn't got one for myself, not that I was trying too hard, but sometimes I felt lonely to see everybody paired off and having a good time and all I did was curl up in my sleeping bag in the rosebushes and sigh and say bah. For me it was just red wine in my mouth and a pile of firewood.

But then I'd find something like a dead crow in the deer park and think "That's a pretty sight for sensitive human eyes, and all of it comes out of sex." So I put sex out of my mind again. As long as the sun shined then blinked and shined again, I was satisfied. I would be kind and remain in solitude, I wouldn't pook about, I'd rest and be kind. "Compassion is the guide star," said Buddha. "Don't dispute with the authorities or with women. Beg. Be humble." I wrote a pretty poem addressed to all the people coming to the party: "Are in your eyelids wars, and silk . . . but the saints are gone, all gone, safe to that other." I really thought myself a kind of crazy saint. And it was based on telling myself "Ray, don't run after liquor and excitement of women and talk, stay in your shack


  187

and enjoy natural relationship of things as they are" but it was hard to live up to this with all kinds of pretty broads coming up the hill every weekend and even on weeknights. One time a beautiful brunette finally consented to go up the hill with me and we were there in the dark on my mattress day-mat when suddenly the door burst open and Sean and Joe Mahoney danced in laughing, deliberately trying to make me mad . . . either that or they really believed in my effort at asceticism and were like angels coming in to drive away the devil woman. Which they did, all right. Sometimes when I was really drunk and high and sitting crosslegged in the midst of the mad parties I really did see visions of holy empty snow in my eyelids and when I opened them I'd see all these good friends sitting around waiting for me to explain; and nobody ever considered my behavior strange, quite natural among Buddhists; and whether I opened my eyes to explain something or not they were satisfied. During that whole season, in fact, I had an overwhelming urge to close my eyes in company. I think the girls were terrified of this. "What's he always sitting with his eyes closed for?"

Little Prajna, Sean's two-year-old daughter, would come and poke at my closed eyelids and say "Booba. Hack!" Sometimes I preferred taking her for little magic walks in the yard, holding her hand, to sitting yakking in the living room.

As for Japhy he was quite pleased with anything I did provided I didn't pull any boners like making the kerosene lamp smoke from turning the wick too far up, or failing to sharpen the ax properly. He was very stern on those subjects. "You've got to learn!" he'd say. "Dammit, if there's anything I can't stand is when things ain't done right." It was amazing the suppers he'd roust up out of his own part of the food shelf,


188

all kinds of weeds and dry roots bought in Chinatown and he'd boil up a mess of stuff, just a little, with soy sauce, and that went on top of freshly boiled rice and was delicious indeed, eaten with chopsticks. There we were sitting in the roar of trees at dusk with our windows wide open still, cold, but going chomp-chomp on delicious home-made Chinese dinners. Japhy really knew how to handle chopsticks and shoveled it in with a will. Then I'd sometimes wash the dishes and go out to meditate awhile on my mat beneath the eucalypti, and in the window of the shack I'd see the brown glow of Japhy's kerosene lamp as he sat reading and picking his teeth. Sometimes he'd come to the door of the shack and yell "Hoo!" and I wouldn't answer and I could hear him mutter "Where the hell is he?" and see him peering out into the night for his bhikku. One night I was sitting meditating when I heard a loud crack to my right and I looked and it was a deer, coming to re-visit the ancient deer park and munch awhile in the dry foliage. Across the evening valley the old mule went with his heartbroken "Hee haw" broken like a yodel in the wind: like a horn blown by some terribly sad angel: like a reminder to people digesting dinners at home that all was not as well as they thought. Yet it was just a love cry for another mule. But that was why . . .

One night I was meditating in such perfect stillness that two mosquitoes came and sat on each of my cheekbones and stayed there a long time without biting and then went away without biting.


189

27
A few days before his big farewell party Japhy and I had an argument. We went into San Francisco to deliver his bike to the freighter at the pier and then went up to Skid Row in a drizzling rain to get cheap haircuts at the barber college and pook around Salvation Army and Goodwill stores in search of long underwear and stuff. As we were walking in the drizzly exciting streets ("Reminds me of Seattle!" he yelled) I got the overwhelming urge to get drunk and feel good. I bought a poorboy of ruby port and uncapped it and dragged Japhy into an alley and we drank. "You better not drink too much," he said, "you know we gotta go to Berkeley after this and attend a lecture and discussion at the Buddhist Center."

"Aw I don't wanta go to no such thing, I just wanta drink in alleys."

"But they're expecting you, I read all your poems there last year."

"I don't care. Look at that fog flyin over the alley and look at this warm ruby red port, don't it make ya feel like singing in the wind?"

"No it doesn't. You know, Ray, Cacoethes says you drink too much."


190

"And him with his ulcer! Why do you think he has an ulcer? Because he drank too much himself. Do I have an ulcer? Not on your life! I drink for joy! If you don't like my drinking you can go to the lecture by yourself. I'll wait at Coughlin's cottage."

"But you'll miss all that, just for some old wine."

"There's wisdom in wine, goddam it!" I yelled. "Have a shot!"

"No I won't!"

"Well then I'll drink it!" and I drained the bottle and we went back on Sixth Street where I immediately jumped back into the same store and bought another poorboy. I was feeling fine now.

Japhy was sad and disappointed. "How do you expect to become a good bhikku or even a Bodhisattva Mahasattva always getting drunk like that?"

"Have you forgotten the last of the Bulls, where he gets drunk with the butchers?"

"Ah so what, how can you understand your own mind essence with your head all muddled and your teeth all stained and your belly all sick?"

"I'm not sick, I'm fine. I could just float up into that gray fog and fly around San Francisco like a seagull. D'l ever tell you about Skid Row here, I used to live here"

"I lived on Skid Road in Seattle myself, I know all about all that."

The neons of stores and bars were glowing in the gray gloom of rainy afternoon, I felt great. After we had our haircuts we went into a Goodwill store and fished around bins, pulling out socks and undershirts and various belts and junk that we bought for a few pennies. I kept taking surreptitious


 191

slugs of wine out of my bottle which I had wedged in my belt.

Japhy was disgusted. Then we got in the jalopy and drove to Berkeley, across the rainy bridge, to the cottages of Oakland and then downtown Oakland, where Japhy wanted to find a pair of jeans that fitted me. We'd been looking all day for used jeans that would fit me. I kept giving him wine and finally he relented a little and drank some and showed me the poem he had written while I was getting my haircut in Skid Row: "Modern barber college, Smith eyes closed suffers a haircut fearing its ugliness 50 cents, a barber student olive-skinned 'Garcia' on his coat, two blond small boys one with feared face and big ears watching from seats, tell him 'You're ugly little boy & you've got big ears' he'd weep and suffer and it wouldn't even  be  true,  the  other thinfaced  conscious  concentrated patched bluejeans and scuffed shoes who watches me delicate, suffering child that grows hard and greedy with puberty, Ray and I with poorboy of ruby port in us rainy May day no used levis in this town, our size, and old barber college t and g crappers skidrow haircuts middleage barber careers start out now flowering."

"See," I said, "you wouldn't have even written that poem if it wasn't for the wine made you feel good!"

"Ah I would have written it anyway. You're just drinking too much all the time, I don't see how you're even going to gain enlightenment and manage to stay out in the mountains, you'll always be coming down the hill spending your bean money on wine and finally you'll end up lying in the street in the rain, dead drunk, and then they'll take you away and you'll have to be reborn a teetotalin bartender to atone for your karma." He was really sad about it, and worried about me, but I just went on drinking.


192 

When we got to Alvah's cottage and it was time to leave for the Buddhist Center lecture I said "I'll just sit here and get drunk and wait for you."

"Okay," said Japhy, looking at me darkly. "It's your life." He was gone for two hours. I felt sad and drank too much and was dizzy. But I was determined not to pass out and stick it out and prove something to Japhy. Suddenly, at dusk, he came running back into the cottage drunk as a hoot owl yelling "You know what happened Smith? I went to the Buddhist lecture and they were all drinking white raw saki out of teacups and everybody got drunk. All those crazy Japanese saints! You were right! It doesn't make any difference! We all got drunk and discussed prajna! It was great!" And after that Japhy and I never had an argument again.

28
The night of the big party came. I could practically hear the hubbubs of preparation going on down the hill and felt depressed. "Oh my God, sociability is just a big smile and a big smile is nothing but teeth, I wish I could just stay up here and rest and be kind." But somebody brought up some wine and that started me off.

That night the wine flowed down the hill like a river. Sean had put together a lot of big logs for an immense bonfire in


193

the yard. It was a clear starry night, warm and pleasant, in May. Everybody came. The party soon became clearly divided into three parts again. I spent most of my time in the living room where we had Cal Tjader records on the hi-fi and a lot of girls were dancing as Bud and I and Sean and sometimes Alvah and his new buddy George played bongo drums on inverted cans.

Out in the yard it was a quieter scene, with the glow of the fire and lots of people sitting on the long logs Sean had placed around the fire, and on the board a spread fit for a king and his hungry retinue. Here, by the fire, far from the freneticism of the bongo-ing living room, Cacoethes held forth discussing poetry with the local wits, in tones about like this: "Marshall Dashiell is too busy cultivating his beard and driving his Mercedes Benz around cocktail parties in Chevy Chase and up Cleopatra's needle, O. O. Dowler is being carried around Long Island in limousines and spending his summers shrieking on St. Mark's Place, and Tough Shit Short alas successfully manages to be a Savile Row fop with bowler and waistcoat, and as for Manuel Drubbing he just flips quarters to see who'll flop in the little reviews, and Omar Tott I got nothing to say. Albert Law Livingston is busy signing autograph copies of his novels and sending Christmas cards to Sarah Vaughan; Ariadne Jones is importuned by the Ford Company; Leontine McGee says she's old, and who does that leave?"

"Ronald Firbank," said Coughlin.

"I guess the only real poets in the country, outside the orbit of this little backyard, are Doctor Musial, who's probably muttering behind his living-room curtains right now, and Dee Sampson, who's too rich. That leaves us dear old Japhy here who's going away to Japan, and our wailing friend Gold-


194

book and our Mr. Coughlin, who has a sharp tongue. By God, I'm the only good one here. At least I've got an honest anarchist background. At least I had frost on my nose, boots on my feet, and protest in my mouth." He stroked his mustache.

"What about Smith?"

"Well I guess he's a Bodhisattva in its frightful aspect, 'ts about all I can say." (Aside, sneering: "He's too drrronk all the time.")

Henry Morley also came that night, only for a short while, and acted very strange sitting in the background reading Mad comic books and the new magazine called Hip, and left early with the remark "The hotdogs are too thin, do you think that's a sign of the times or are Armour and Swift using stray Mexicans you think?" Nobody talked to him except me and Japhy. I was sorry to see him leave so soon, he was ungraspable as a ghost, as ever. Nevertheless he had worn a brand-new brown suit for the occasion, and suddenly he was gone.

Up the hill meanwhile, where the stars nodded on trees, occasional couples were sneaking up to neck or just brought jugs of wine and guitars up and had separate little parties in our shack. It was a great night. Japhy's father finally came, after work, and he was a tight-built little tough guy just like Japhy, balding a little, but completely energetic and crazy just like his son. He immediately began dancing wild mambos with the girls while I beat madly on a can. "Go, man!" You never saw a more frantic dancer: he stood there, bending way back till he was almost falling over, moving his loins at the girl, sweating, eager, grinning, glad, the maddest father I ever saw. Just recently at his daughter's wedding he had broken up the lawn reception by rushing out on his hands and knees with a tiger skin on his back, snapping at the


195

ladies' heels and barking. Now he took a tall almost sixfoot gal by the name of Jane and swung her around and almost knocked over the bookcase. Japhy kept wandering to all sections of the party with a big jug in his hand, his face beaming with happiness. For a while the party in the living room emptied out the bonfire clique and soon Psyche and Japhy were doing a mad dance, then Sean leaped up and whirled her around and she made as if to swoon and fell right in between Bud and me sitting on the floor drumming (Bud and I who never had girls of our own and ignored everything), and lay there a second sleeping on our laps. We puffed on our pipes and drummed on. Polly Whitmore kept hanging around the kitchen helping Christine with the cooking and even turning out a batch of delicious cookies of her own. I saw she was lonely because Psyche was there and Japhy wasn't hers so I went over to grab her by the waist but she looked at me with such fear I didn't do anything. She seemed to be terrified of me. Princess was there with her new boyfriend and she too was pouting in a corner.

I said to Japhy "What the hell you gonna do with all these broads? Ain't you gonna give me one?"

"Take whichever one you want. I'm neutral tonight."

I went out to the bonfire to hear Cacoethes' latest witticisms. Arthur Whane was sitting on a log, well dressed, necktie and suit, and I went over and asked him "Well what is Buddhism? Is it fantastic imagination magic of the lightning flash, is it plays, dreams, not even plays, dreams?"

"No, to me Buddhism is getting to know as many people as possible." And there he was going around the party real affable shaking hands with everybody and chatting, a regular cocktail party. The party inside was getting more and more frantic. I began to dance with the tall girl myself. She was


196  

wild. I wanted to sneak her up on the hill with a jug but her husband was there. Later in the night a crazy colored guy showed up and began playing bongos on his own head and cheeks and mouth and chest, whacking himself with real loud sounds, and a great beat, a tremendous beat. Everybody was delighted and declared he must be a Bodhisattva.

People of all kinds were pouring in from the city, where news of the great party was going the rounds of our bars. Suddenly I looked up and Alvah and George were walking around naked.

"What are you doing?"

"Oh, we just decided to take our clothes off."

Nobody seemed to mind. In fact I saw Cacoethes and Arthur Whane well dressed standing having a polite conversation in the firelight with the two naked madmen, a kind of serious conversation about world affairs. Finally Japhy also got naked and wandered around with his jug. Every time one of his girls looked at him he gave a loud roar and leaped at them and they ran out of the house squealing. It was insane. I wondered what would ever happen if the cops in Corte Madera got wind of this and came roarin up the hill in their squad cars. The bonfire was bright, anybody down the road could see everything that was going on in the yard. Nevertheless it was strangely not out of place to see the bonfire, the food on the board, hear the guitar players, see the dense trees swaying in the breeze and a few naked men in the party.

I talked to Japhy's father and said "What you think about Japhy bein naked?"

"Oh I don't give a damn, Japh can do anything he wants far as I'm concerned. Say where's that big old tall gal we was


197

dancin with?" He was a pure Dharma Bum father. He had had it rough too, in his early years in the Oregon woods, taking care of a whole family in a cabin he'd built himself and all the horny-headed troubles of trying to raise crops in merciless country, and the cold winters. Now he was a well-to-do painting contractor and had built himself one of the finest houses in Mill Valley and took good care of his sister. Japhy's own mother was alone living in a rooming house in the north. Japhy was going to take care of her when he got back from Japan. I had seen a lonely letter from her. Japhy said his parents had separated with a great deal of finality but when he got back from the monastery he would see what he could do to take care of her. Japhy didn't like to talk about her, and his father of course never mentioned her at all. But I liked Japhy's father, the way he danced sweating and mad, the way he didn't mind any of the eccentric sights he saw, the way he let everybody do what they wanted anyway and went home around midnight in a shower of thrown flowers dancing off down to his car parked in the road.

Al Lark was another nice guy who was there, just kept sitting sprawled with his guitar plucking out rumbling rambling blues chords or sometimes flamenco and looking off into space, and when the party was over at three a.m. he and his wife went to sleep in sleeping bags in the yard and I could hear them goofing in the grass. "Let's dance," she said. "Ah, go to sleep!" he said.

Psyche and Japhy were sore at each other that night and she didn't want to come up the hill and honor his new white sheets and stomped off to leave. I watched Japhy going up the hill, weaving drunk, the party was over.


198  

I went with Psyche to her car and said "Come on, why do you make Japhy unhappy on his farewell night?"

"Oh he was mean to me, the hell with him."

"Aw come on, nobody'll eat you up the hill."

"I don't care, I'm driving back to the city."

"Well, that's not nice, and Japhy told me he loved you."

"I don't believe it."

"That's the story of life," I said walking away with a huge jug of wine hooked in my forefinger and I started up the hill and heard Psyche trying to back up her car and do a U-turn in the narrow road and the back end landed in the ditch and she couldn't get out and had to sleep on Christine's floor anyway. Meanwhile Bud and Coughlin and Alvah and George were all up in the shack sprawled out in various blankets and sleeping bags on the floors. I put my bag down in the sweet grass and felt I was the most fortunate person of the lot. So the party was over and all the screaming was done and what was accomplished? I began to sing in the night, enjoying myself with the jug. The stars were blinding bright.

"A mosquito as big as Mount Sumeru is much bigger than you think!" yelled Coughlin from inside the shack, hearing me sing.

I yelled back, "A horse's hoof is more delicate than it looks!"

Alvah came running out in his long underwear and did a big dance and howled long poems in the grass. Finally we had Bud up talking earnestly about his latest idea. We had a kind of a new party up there. "Let's go down see how many gals are left!" I went down the hill rolling half the way and tried to make Psyche come up again but she was out like a light on the floor. The embers of the big bonfire were still red hot and plenty of heat was being given off. Sean was snoring in his


199

wife's bedroom. I took some bread from the board and spread cottage cheese on it and ate, and drank wine. I was all alone by the fire and it was getting gray dawn in the east. "Boy, am I drunk!" I said. "Wake up! wake up!" I yelled. "The goat of day is butting dawn! No ifs or buts! Bang! Come on, you girls! gimps! punks! thieves! pimps! hangmen! Run!" Then I suddenly had the most tremendous feeling of the pitifulness of human beings, whatever they were, their faces, pained mouths, personalities, attempts to be gay, little petulances, feelings of loss, their dull and empty witticisms so soon forgotten: Ah, for what? I knew that the sound of silence was everywhere and therefore everything everywhere was silence. Suppose we suddenly wake up and see that what we thought to be this and that, ain't this and that at all? I staggered up the hill, greeted by birds, and looked at all the huddled sleeping figures on the floor. Who were all these strange ghosts rooted to the silly little adventure of earth with me? And who was I? Poor Japhy, at eight a.m. he got up and banged on his frying pan and chanted the "Gocchami" chant and called everybody to pancakes.

29
The party went on for days; the morning of the third day people were still sprawled about the grounds when Japhy and I sneaked our rucksacks out, with a few choice gro-


200  

ceries, and started down the road in the orange early-morning sun of California golden days. It was going to be a great day, we were back in our element: trails.

Japhy was in high spirits. "Goddammit it feels good to get away from dissipation and go in the woods. When I get back from Japan, Ray, when the weather gets really cold we'll put on our long underwear and hitchhike through the land. Think if you can of ocean to mountain Alaska to Klamath a solid forest of fir to bhikku in, a lake of a million wild geese. Woo! You know what woo means in Chinese?" '

"What?"

"Fog. These woods are great here in Marin, I'll show you Muir Woods today, but up north is all that real old Pacific Coast mountain and ocean land, the future home of the Dharma-body. Know what I'm gonna do? I'll do a new long poem called 'Rivers and Mountains Without End' and just write it on and on on a scroll and unfold on and on with new surprises and always what went before forgotten, see, like a river, or like one of them real long Chinese silk paintings that show two little men hiking in an endless landscape of gnarled old trees and mountains so high they merge with the fog in the upper silk void. I'll spend three thousand years writing it, it'll be packed full of information on soil conservation, the Tennessee Valley Authority, astronomy, geology, Hsuan Tsung's travels, Chinese painting theory, reforestation, Oceanic ecology and food chains."

"Go to it, boy." As ever I strode on behind him and when we began to climb, with our packs feeling good on our backs as though we were pack animals and didn't feel right without a burden, it was that same old lonesome old good old thwap thwap up the trail, slowly, a mile an hour. We came to the


201

end of the steep road where we had to go through a few houses built near steep bushy cliffs with waterfalls trickling down, then up to a high steep meadow, full of butterflies and hay and a little seven a.m. dew, and down to a dirt road, then to the end of the dirt road, which rose higher and higher till we could see vistas of Corte Madera and Mill Valley far away and even the red top of Golden Gate Bridge.

"Tomorrow afternoon on our run to Stimson Beach," said Japhy, "you'll see the whole white city of San Francisco miles away in the blue bay. Ray, by God, later on in our future life we can have a fine free-wheeling tribe in these California hills, get girls and have dozens of radiant enlightened brats, live like Indians in hogans and eat berries and buds."

"No beans?"

"We'll write poems, we'll get a printing press and print our own poems, the Dharma Press, we'll poetize the lot and make a fat book of icy bombs for the booby public."

"Ah the public ain't so bad, they suffer too. You always read about some tarpaper shack burning somewhere in the Middlewest with three little children perishing and you see a picture of the parents crying. Even the kitty was burned. Japhy, do you think God made the world to amuse himself because he was bored? Because if so he would have to be mean."

"Ho, who would you mean by God?"

"Just Tathagata, if you will."

"Well it says in the sutra that God, or Tathagata, doesn't himself emanate a world from his womb but it just appears due to the ignorance of sentient beings."

"But he emanated the sentient beings and their ignorance too. It's all too pitiful. I ain't gonna rest till I find out why, Japhy, why."


202

"Ah don't trouble your mind essence. Remember that in pure Tathagata mind essence there is no asking of the question why and not even any significance attached to it."

"Well, then nothing's really happening, then."

He threw a stick at me and hit me on the foot.

"Well, that didn't happen," I said.

"I really don't know, Ray, but I appreciate your sadness about the world. 'Tis indeed. Look at that party the other night. Everybody wanted to have a good time and tried real hard but we all woke up the next day feeling sorta sad and separate. What do you think about death, Ray?"

"I think death is our reward. When we die we go straight to nirvana Heaven and that's that."

"But supposing you're reborn in the lower hells and have hot redhot balls of iron shoved down your throat by devils."

"Life's already shoved an iron foot down my mouth. But I don't think that's anything but a dream cooked up by some hysterical monks who didn't understand Buddha's peace under the Bo Tree or for that matter Christ's peace looking down on the heads of his tormentors and forgiving them."

"You really like Christ, don't you?"

"Of course I do. And after all, a lot of people say he is Maitreya, the Buddha prophesied to appear after Sakyamuni, you know, Maitreya means 'Love' in Sanskrit and that's all Christ talked about was love."

"Oh, don't start preaching Christianity to me, I can just see you on your deathbed kissing the cross like some old Karamazov or like our old friend Dwight Goddard who spent his life as a Buddhist and suddenly returned to Christianity in his last days. Ah that's not for me, I want to spend hours every day in a lonely temple meditating in front of a sealed statue of


203

Kwannon which no one is ever allowed to see because it's too powerful. Strike hard, old diamond!" "It'll all come out in the wash."

"You remember Rol Sturlason my buddy who went to Japan to study those rocks of Ryoanji. He went over on a freighter named Sea Serpent so he painted a big mural of a sea serpent and mermaids on a bulkhead in the messhall to the delight of the crew who dug him like crazy and all wanted to become Dharma Bums right there. Now he's climbing up holy Mount Hiei in Kyoto through a foot of snow probably, straight up where there are no trails, steep steep, through bamboo thickets and twisty pine like in brush drawings. Feet wet and lunch forgot, that's the way to climb." "What are you going to wear in the monastery, anyway?" "Oh man, the works, old T'ang Dynasty style things long black floppy with huge droopy sleeves and funny pleats, make you feel real Oriental."

"Alvah says that while guys like us are all excited about being real Orientals and wearing robes, actual Orientals over there are reading surrealism and Charles Darwin and mad about Western business suits."

"East'11 meet West anyway. Think what a great world revolution will take place when East meets West finally, and it'll be guys like us that can start the thing. Think of millions of guys all over the world with rucksacks on their backs tramping around the back country and hitchhiking and bringing the word down to everybody."

"That's a lot like the early days of the Crusades, Walter the Penniless and Peter the Hermit leading ragged bands of believers to the Holy Land." "Yeah but that was all such European gloom and crap, I


204

want my Dharma Bums to have springtime in their hearts when the blooms are girling and the birds are dropping little fresh turds surprising cats who wanted to eat them a moment ago."

"What are you thinking about?"

"Just makin up poems in my head as I climb toward Mount Tamalpais. See up there ahead, as beautiful a mountain as you'll see anywhere in the world, a beautiful shape to it, I really love Tamalpais. We'll sleep tonight way around the back of it. Take us till late afternoon to get there."

The Marin country was much more rustic and kindly than the rough Sierra country we'd climbed last fall: it was all flowers, flowers, trees, bushes, but also a great deal of poison oak by the side of the trail. When we got to the end of the high dirt road we suddenly plunged into the dense redwood forest and went along following a pipeline through glades that were so deep the fresh morning sun barely penetrated and it was cold and damp. But the odor was pure deep rich pine and wet logs. Japhy was all talk this morning. He was like a little kid again now that he was out on the trail. "The only thing wrong with that monastery shot in Japan for me, is, though for all their intelligence and good intentions, the Americans out there, they have so little real sense of America and who the people are who really dig Buddhism here, and they don't have any use for poetry."

"Who?"

"Well, the people who are sending me out there and finance things. They spend their good money fixing elegant scenes of gardens and books and Japanese architecture and all that crap which nobody will like or be able to use anyway but rich American divorcees on Japanese cruises and all they really


205

should do is just build or buy an old Jap house and vegetable garden and have a place there for cats to hang out in and be Buddhists, I mean have a real flower of something and not just the usual American middleclass fuggup with appearances. Anyway I'm looking forward to it, oh boy I can just see myself in the morning sitting on the mats with a low table at my side, typing on my portable, and my hibachi nearby with a pot of hot water on it keeping hot and all my papers and maps and pipe and flashlight neatly packed away and outside plum trees and pines with snow on the boughs and up on Mount Hieizan the snow getting deep and sugi and hinoki all around, them's redwoods, boy, and cedars. Little tucked-away temples down the rocky trails, cold mossy ancient places where frogs croak, and inside small statues and hanging buttery lamps and gold lotuses and paintings and ancient incense-soaked smells and lacquer chests with statues." His boat was leaving in two days. "But I'm sad too about leaving California . . . s'why I wanted to take one last long look at it today with ya, Ray."

We came up out of the gladey redwood forest onto a road, where there was a mountain lodge, then crossed the road and dipped down again through bushes to a trail that probably nobody even knew was there except a few hikers, and we were in Muir Woods. It extended, a vast valley, for miles before us. An old logger road led us for two miles then Japhy got off and scrambled up the slope and got onto another trail nobody dreamed was there. We hiked on this one, up and down along a tumbling creek, with fallen logs again where you crossed the creek, and sometimes bridges that had been built Japhy said by the Boy Scouts, trees sawed in half the flat surface for walking. Then we climbed up a steep pine slope and came


206 

out to the highway and went up the side of a hill of grass and came out in some outdoor theater, done up Greek style with stone seats all around a bare stone arrangement for four-dimensional presentations of Aeschylus and Sophocles. We drank water and sat down and took our shoes off and watched the silent play from the upper stone seats. Far away you could see the Golden Gate Bridge and the whiteness of San Francisco.

Japhy began to shriek and hoot and whistle and sing, full of pure gladness. Nobody around to hear him. "This is the way you'll be on top of Mount Desolation, this summer, Ray."

"I'll sing at the top of my voice for the first time in my life."

"If anybody hears ya it'll just be the conies, or maybe a critic bear. Ray that Skagit country where you're going is the greatest place in America, that snaky river running back through gorges and into its own unpeopled watershed, wet snowy mountains fading into dry pine mountains and deep valleys like Big Beaver and Little Beaver with some of the best virgin stands of red cedar left in the world. I keep thinking of my abandoned Crater Mountain Lookout house sitting up there with nobody but the conies in the howling winds, getting old, the conies down in their furry nests deep under boulders, and warm, eating seeds or whatever they eat. The closer you get to real matter, rock air fire and wood, boy, the more spiritual the world is. All these people thinking they're hardheaded materialistic practical types, they don't know shit about matter, their heads are full of dreamy ideas and notions." He raised his hand. "Listen to that quail calling."

"I wonder what everybody's doing back at Sean's."

"Well they're all up now and starting on that sour old red wine again and sitting around talking nothing. They should


  207

have all come with us and learnt something." He picked up his pack and started off. In a half-hour we were in a beautiful meadow following a dusty little trail over shallow creeks and finally we were at Potrero Meadows camp. It was a National Forest camp with a stone fireplace and picnic tables and everything but no one would be there till the weekend. A few miles away, the lookout shack on top of Tamalpais looked right down on us. We undid our packs and spent a quiet late afternoon dozing in the sun or Japhy ran around looking at butterflies and birds and making notes in his notebook and I hiked alone down the other side, north, where a desolate rocky country much like the Sierras stretched out toward the sea.

At dusk Japhy lit a good big fire and started supper. We were very tired and happy. He made a soup that night that I shall never forget and was really the best soup I'd eaten since I was a lionized young author in New York eating lunch at the Chambord or in Henri Cru's kitchen. This was nothing but a couple of envelopes of dried pea soup thrown into a pot of water with fried bacon, fat and all, and stirred till boiling. It was rich, real pea taste, with that smoky bacon and bacon fat, just the thing to drink in the cold gathering darkness by a sparkling fire. Also while pooking about he'd found puffballs, natural mushrooms, not the umbrella type, just round grapefruit-size puffs of white firm meat, and these he sliced and fried in bacon fat and we had them on the side with fried rice. It was a great supper. We washed the dishes in the gurgling creek. The roaring bonfire kept the mosquitoes away. A new moon peeked down through the pine boughs. We rolled out our sleeping bags in the meadow grass and went to bed early, bone weary.


208

"Well Ray," said Japhy, "pretty soon I'll be far out to sea and you'll be hitchhiking up the coast to Seattle and on through the Skagit country. I wonder what'll happen to all of us."

We went to sleep on this dreamy theme. During the night I had a vivid dream, one of the most distinct dreams I ever had, I clearly saw a crowded dirty smoky Chinese market with beggars and vendors and pack horses and mud and smokepots and piles of rubbish and vegetables for sale in dirty clay pans on the ground and suddenly from the mountains a ragged hobo, a little seamed brown unimaginable Chinese hobo, had come down and was just standing at the end of the market, surveying it with an expressionless humor. He was short, wiry, his face leathered hard and dark red by the sun of the desert and the mountains; his clothes were nothing but gathered rags; he had a pack of leather on his back; he was barefooted. I had seen guys like that only seldom, and only in Mexico, maybe coming into Monterrey out of those stark rock mountains, beggars who probably live in caves. But this one was a Chinese twice-as-poor, twice-as-tough and infinitely mysterious tramp and it was Japhy for sure. It was the same broad mouth, merry twinkling eyes, bony face (a face like Dostoevsky's death mask, with prominent eyebrow bones and square head); and he was short and compact like Japhy. I woke up at dawn, thinking "Wow, is that what'll happen to Japhy? Maybe he'll leave that monastery and just disappear and we'll never see him again, and he'll be the Han Shan ghost of the Orient mountains and even the Chinese'11 be afraid of him he'll be so raggedy and beat."

I told Japhy about it. He was already up stoking the fire and whistling. "Well don't just lay there in your sleeping bag


209

pullin your puddin, get up and fetch some water. Yodelayhee hoo! Ray, I will bring you incense sticks from the cold water temple of Kiyomizu and set them one by one in a big brass incense bowl and do the proper bows, how's about that. That was some dream you had. If that's me, then it's me. Ever weeping, ever youthful, hoo!" He got out the hand-ax from the rucksack and hammered at boughs and got a crackling fire going. There was still mist in the trees and fog on the ground. "Let's pack up and take off and dig Laurel Dell camp. Then we'll hike over the trails down to the sea and swim."

"Great." On this trip Japhy had brought along a delicious combination for hiking energy: Ry-Krisp crackers, good sharp Cheddar cheese a wedge of that, and a roll of salami. We had this for breakfast with hot fresh tea and felt great. Two grown men could live two days on that concentrated bread and that salami (concentrated meat) and cheese and the whole thing only weighed about a pound and a half. Japhy was full of great ideas like that. What hope, what human energy, what truly American optimism was packed in that neat little frame of his! There he was clomping along in front of me on the trail and shouting back "Try the meditation of the trail, just walk along looking at the trail at your feet and don't look about and just fall into a trance as the ground zips by."

We arrived at Laurel Dell camp at about ten, it was also supplied with stone fireplaces with grates, and picnic tables, but the surroundings were infinitely more beautiful than Potrero Meadows. Here were the real meadows: dreamy beauties with soft grass sloping all around, fringed by heavy deep green timber, the whole scene of waving grass and brooks and nothing in sight.

"By God, I'm gonna come back here and bring nothing but


210

food and gasoline and a primus and cook my suppers smokeless and the Forest Service won't even know the difference."

"Yeah, but if they ever catch you cooking away from these stone places they put you out, Smith."

"But what would I do on weekends, join the merry picnickers? I'd just hide up there beyond that beautiful meadow. I'd stay there forever."

"And you'd only have two miles of trail down to Stimson Beach and your grocery store down there." At noon we started for the beach. It was a tremendously grinding trip. We climbed way up high on meadows, where again we could see San Francisco far away, then dipped down into a steep trail that seemed to fall directly down to sea level; you had sometimes to run down the trail or slide on your back, one. A torrent of water fell down at the side of the trail. I went ahead of Japhy and began swinging down the trail so fast, singing happily, I left him behind about a mile and had to wait for him at the bottom. He was taking his time enjoying the ferns and flowers. We stashed our rucksacks in the fallen leaves under bushes and hiked freely down the sea meadows and past seaside farmhouses with cows browsing, to the beach community, where we bought wine in a grocery store and stomped on out into the sand and the waves. It was a chill day with only occasional flashes of sun. But we were making it. We jumped into the ocean in our shorts and swam swiftly around then came out and spread out some of our salami and Ry-Krisp and cheese on a piece of paper in the sand and drank wine and talked. At one point I even took a nap. Japhy was feeling very good. "Goddammit, Ray, you'll never know how happy I am we decided to have these last two days hiking. I feel good all over again. I know somethin good's gonna come out of all this!"


211

"All what?"

"I dunnoout of the way we feel about life. You and I ain't out to bust anybody's skull, or cut someone's throat in an economic way, we've dedicated ourselves to prayer for all sentient beings and when we're strong enough we'll really be able to do it, too, like the old saints. Who knows, the world might wake up and burst out into a beautiful flower of Dharma everywhere."

After dozing awhile he woke up and looked and said, "Look at all that water out there stretching all the way to Japan." He was getting sadder and sadder about leaving.

30
We started back and found our packs and went back up that trail that had dropped straight down to sea level, a sheer crawling handgrasping climb among rocks and little trees that exhausted us, but finally we came out on a beautiful meadow and climbed it and again saw all San Francisco in the distance. "Jack London used to walk this trail," said Japhy. We proceeded along the south slope of a beautiful mountain that afforded us a view of the Golden Gate and even of Oakland miles away for hours on end as we trudged. There were beautiful natural parks of serene oaks, all golden and green in the late afternoon, and many wild flowers. Once


212

we saw a fawn standing at a nub of grass, staring at us with wonder. We came down off this meadow down deep into a redwood forest then up again, again so steeply that we were cursing and sweating in the dust. Trails are like that: you're floating along in a Shakespearean Arden paradise and expect to see nymphs and fluteboys, then suddenly you're struggling in a hot broiling sun of hell in dust and nettles and poison oak . . . just like life. "Bad karma automatically produces good karma," said Japhy, "don't cuss so much and come on, we'll soon be sitting pretty on a flat hill."

The last two miles of the hill were terrible and I said "Japhy there's one thing I would like right now more than anything in the worldmore than anything I've ever wanted all my life." Cold dusk winds were blowing, we hurried bent with our packs on the endless trail. "What?"

"A nice big Hershey bar or even a little one. For some reason or other, a Hershey bar would save my soul right now."

"There's your Buddhism, a Hershey bar. How about moonlight in an orange grove and a vanilla ice-cream cone?"

"Too cold. What I need, want, pray for, yearn for, dying for, right now, is a Hershey bar ... with nuts." We were very tired and trudging along home talking like two children. I kept repeating and repeating about my good old Hershey bar. I really meant it. I needed the energy anyway, I was a little woozy and needed sugar, but to think of chocolate and peanuts all melting in my mouth in that cold wind, it was too much.

Soon we were climbing over the corral fence that led to the horse meadow over our shack and then climbing over the barbed-wire fence right in our yard and trudging down


 213

the final twenty feet of high grass past my rosebush bed to the door of the good old little shack. It was our last night home together. We sat sadly in the dark shack taking off our boots and sighing. I couldn't do anything but sit on my feet, sitting on my feet took the pain out of them. "No more hikes for me forever," I said.

Japhy said "Well we still have to get supper and I see where we used up everything this weekend. I'll have to go down the road to the supermarket and get some food."

"Oh, man, aren't you tired? Just go to bed, we'll eat tomorrow." But he sadly put on his boots again and went out. Everybody was gone, the party had ended when it was found that Japhy and I had disappeared. I lit the fire and lay down and even slept awhile and suddenly it was dark and Japhy came in and lit the kerosene lamp and dumped the groceries on the table, and among them were three bars of Hershey chocolate just for me. It was the greatest Hershey bar I ever ate. He'd also brought my favorite wine, red port, just for me.

"I'm leaving, Ray, and I figured you and me might celebrate a little. . . ." His voice trailed off sadly and tiredly. When Japhy was tired, and he often wore himself out completely hiking or working, his voice sounded far-off and small. But pretty soon he roused his resources together and began cooking a supper and singing at the stove like a millionaire, stomping around in his boots on the resounding wood floor, arranging bouquets of flowers in the clay pots, boiling water for tea, plucking on his guitar, trying to cheer me up as I lay there staring sadly at the burlap ceiling. It was our last night, we both felt it.

"I wonder which one of us'll die first," I mused out loud. "Whoever it is, come on back, ghost, and give 'em the key."


214 

"Ha!" He brought me my supper and we sat crosslegged and chomped away as on so many nights before: just the wind furying in the ocean of trees and our teeth going chomp chomp over good simple mournful bhikku food. "Just think, Ray, what it was like right here on this hill where our shack stands thirty thousand years ago in the time of the Neanderthal man. And do you realize that they say in the sutras there was a Buddha of that time, Dipankara?"

"The one who never said anything!"

"Can't you just see all those enlightened monkey men sitting around a roaring woodfire around their Buddha saying nothing and knowing everything?"

"The stars were the same then as they are tonight."

Later that night Sean came up and sat crosslegged and talked briefly and sadly with Japhy. It was all over. Then Christine came up with both children in her arms, she was a good strong girl and could climb hills with great burdens. That night I went to sleep in my bag by the rosebush and rued the sudden cold darkness that had fallen over the shack. It reminded me of the early chapters in the life of Buddha, when he decides to leave the Palace, leaving his mourning wife and child and his poor father and riding away on a white horse to go cut off his golden hair in the woods and send the horse back with the weeping servant, and embarks on a mournful journey through the forest to find the truth forever. "Like as the birds that gather in the trees of afternoon," wrote Ashvhaghosha almost two thousand years ago, "then at nightfall vanish all away, so are the separations of the world."

The next day I figured to give Japhy some kind of strange little going-away gift and didn't have much money or any


215

ideas particularly so I took a little piece of paper about as big as a thumbnail and carefully printed on it: MAY YOU USE THE DIAMONDCUTTER OF MERCY and when I said goodbye to him at the pier I handed it to him, and he read it, put it right in his pocket, and said nothing.

The last thing he was seen doing in San Francisco: Psyche had finally melted and written him a note saying "Meet me on your ship in your cabin and I'll give you what you want," or words to that effect, so that was why none of us went on board to see him off in his cabin, Psyche was waiting there for a final passionate love scene. Only Sean was allowed to go aboard and hover around for whatever was going to happen. So after we all waved goodbye and went away, Japhy and Psyche presumably made love in the cabin and then she began to cry and insist she wanted to go to Japan too and the captain ordered everybody off but she wouldn't get off and the last thing was: the boat was pulling away from the pier and Japhy came out on deck with Psyche in his arms and threw her clean off the boat, he was strong enough to throw a girl ten feet, right on the pier, where Sean helped catch her. And though it wasn't exactly in keeping with the diamondcutter of mercy it was good enough, he wanted to get to that other shore and get on to his business. His business was with the Dharma. And the freighter sailed away out the Golden Gate and out to the deep swells of the gray Pacific, westward across. Psyche cried, Sean cried, everybody felt sad.

Warren Coughlin said "Too bad, he'll probably disappear into Central Asia marching about on a quiet but steady round from Kashgar to Lanchow via Lhasa with a string of yaks selling popcorn, safety-pins, and assorted colors of sewing-thread and occasionally climb a Himalaya and end up en-


2l6

lightening the Dalai Lama and all the gang for miles around and never be heard of again."

"No he won't," I said, "he loves us too much."

Alvah said, "It all ends in tears anyway."

31
Now, as though Japhy's finger were pointing me the way, I started north to my mountain.

It was the morning of June 18, 1956. I came down and said goodbye to Christine and thanked her for everything and walked down the road. She waved from the grassy yard. "It's going to be lonely around here with everybody gone and no big huge parties on weekends." She really enjoyed everything that had gone on. There she was standing in the yard barefooted, with little barefooted Prajna, as I walked off along the horse meadow.

I had an easy trip north, as though Japhy's best wishes for me to get to my mountain that could be kept forever, were with me. On 101 I immediately got a ride from a teacher of social studies, from Boston originally, who used to sing on Cape Cod and had fainted just yesterday at his buddy's wedding because he'd been fasting. When he left me off at Cloverdale I bought my supplies for the road: a salami, Cheddar cheese wedge, Ry-Krisp and also some dates for dessert, all


217

put away neatly in my foodwrappers. I still had peanuts and raisins left over from our last hike together. Japhy had said, "I won't be needing those peanuts and raisins on that freighter." I recalled with a twinge of sadness how Japhy was always so dead serious about food, and I wished the whole world was dead serious about food instead of silly rockets and machines and explosives using everybody's food money to blow their heads off anyway.

I hiked about a mile after eating my lunch in back of a garage, up to a bridge on the Russian River, where, in gray gloom, I was stuck for as much as three hours. But suddenly I got an unexpected short ride from a farmer with a tic that made his face twitch, with his wife and boy, to a small town, Preston, where a truckdriver offered me a ride all the way to Eureka ("Eureka!" I yelled) and then he got talking to me and said "Goldang it I get lonesome driving this rig, I want someone to talk to all night, I'll take you all the way to Crescent City if you want." This was a little off my route but farther north than Eureka so I said okay. The guy's name was Ray Breton, he drove me two hundred and eighty miles all night in the rain, talking ceaselessly about his whole life, his brothers, his wives, sons, his father and at Humboldt Redwood Forest in a restaurant called Forest of Arden I had a fabulous dinner of fried shrimp with huge strawberry pie and vanilla ice cream for dessert and a whole pot of coffee and he paid for the whole works. I got him off talking about his troubles to talk about the Last Things and he said, "Yeah, those who're good stay in Heaven, they've been in Heaven from the beginning," which was very wise.

We drove through the rainy night and arrived at Crescent City at dawn in a gray fog, a small town by the sea, and


2l8 

parked the truck in the sand by the beach and slept an hour. Then he left me after buying me a breakfast of pancakes and eggs, probably sick and tired of paying for all my meals, and I started walking out of Crescent City and over on an eastward road, Highway 199, to get back to big-shot 99 that would shoot me to Portland and Seattle faster than the more picturesque but slower coast road.

Suddenly I felt so free I began to walk on the wrong side of the road and sticking out my thumb from that side, hiking like a Chinese Saint to Nowhere for no reason, going to my mountain to rejoice. Poor little angel world! I suddenly didn't care any more, I'd walk all the way. But just because I was dancing along on the wrong side of the road and didn't care, anybody began to pick me up immediately, a goldminer with a small caterpillar up front being hauled by his son, and we had a long talk about the woods, the Siskiyou Mountains (through which we were driving, toward Grants Pass Oregon), and how to make good baked fish, he said, just by lighting a fire in the clean yellow sand by a creek and then burying the fish in the hot sand after you've scraped away the fire and just leaving it there a few hours then taking it out and cleaning it of sand. He was very interested in my rucksack and my plans.

He left me off at a mountain village very similar to Bridgeport California where Japhy and I had sat in the sun. I walked out a mile and took a nap in the woods, right in the heart of the Siskiyou Range. I woke up from my nap feeling very strange in the Chinese unknown fog. I walked on the same way, wrong side, got a ride at Kerby from a blond used-car dealer to Grants Pass, and there, after a fat cowboy in a gravel truck with a malicious grin on his face deliberately tried to run


   219

over my rucksack in the road, I got a ride from a sad logger boy in a tin hat going very fast across a great swooping up and down dream valley thruway to Canyonville, where, as in a dream, a crazy store-truck full of gloves for sale stopped and the driver, Ernest Petersen, chatting amiably all the way and insisting that I sit on the seat that faced him (so that I was being zoomed down the road backward) took me to Eugene Oregon. He talked about everything under the sun, bought me two beers, and even stopped at several gas stations and hung out displays of gloves. He said, "My father was a great man, his saying was 'There are more horses'- asses than horses in this world.' " He was a mad sports fan and timed outdoor track meets with a stopwatch and rushed around fearlessly and independently in his own truck defying local attempts to get him in the unions.

At red nightfall he bade me farewell near a sweet pond outside Eugene. There I intended to spend the night. I spread my bag out under a pine in a dense thicket across the road from cute suburban cottages that couldn't see me and wouldn't see me because they were all looking at television anyway, and ate my supper and slept twelve hours in the bag, waking up only once in the middle of the night to put on mosquito repellent.

At morning I could see the mighty beginnings of the Cascade Range, the northernmost end of which would be my mountain on the skirt of Canada, four hundred more miles north. The morning brook was smoky because of the lumber mill across the highway. I washed up in the brook and took off after one short prayer over the beads Japhy had given me in Matterhorn camp: "Adoration to emptiness of the divine Buddha bead."


220

I immediately got a ride on the open highway from two tough young hombres to outside Junction City where I had coffee and walked two miles to a roadside restaurant that looked better and had pancakes and then walking along the highway rocks, cars zipping by, wondering how I'd ever get to Portland let alone Seattle, I got a ride from a little funny lighthaired housepainter with spattered shoes and four pint cans of cold beer who also stopped at a roadside tavern for more beer and finally we were in Portland crossing vast eternity bridges as draws went up behind us to allow crane barges through in the big smoky river city scene surrounded by pine ridges. In downtown Portland I took the twenty-five-cent bus to Vancouver Washington, ate a Coney Island hamburger there, then out on the road, 99, where a sweet young mustached one-kidney Bodhisattva Okie picked me up and said "I'm s'proud I picked you up, someone to talk to," and everywhere we stopped for coffee he played the pinball machines with dead seriousness and also he picked up all hitchhikers on the road, first a big drawling Okie from Alabama then a crazy sailor from Montana who was full of crazed intelligent talk and we balled right up to Olympia Washington at eighty m.p.h. then up Olympic Peninsula on curvy woodsroads to the Naval Base at Bremerton Washington where a fifty-cent ferry ride was all that separated me from Seattle!

We said goodbye and the Okie bum and I went on the ferry, I paid his fare in gratitude for my terrific good luck on the road, and even gave him handfuls of peanuts and raisins which he devoured hungrily so I also gave him salami and cheese.

Then, while he sat in the main room, I went topdeck as the ferry pulled out in a cold drizzle to dig and enjoy Puget


221

Sound. It was one hour sailing to the Port of Seattle and I found a half-pint of vodka stuck in the deck rail concealed under a Time magazine and just casually drank it and opened my rucksack and took out my warm sweater to go under my rain jacket and paced up and down all alone on the cold fog-swept deck feeling wild and lyrical. And suddenly I saw that the Northwest was a great deal more than the little vision I had of it of Japhy in my mind. It was miles and miles of unbelievable mountains grooking on all horizons in the wild broken clouds, Mount Olympus and Mount Baker, a giant orange sash in the gloom over the Pacific-ward skies that led I knew toward the Hokkaido Siberian desolations of the world. I huddled against the bridgehouse hearing the Mark Twain talk of the skipper and the wheelman inside. In the deepened dusk fog ahead the big red neons saying: PORT OF SEATTLE. And suddenly everything Japhy had ever told me about Seattle began to seep into me like cold rain, I could feel it and see it now, and not just think it. It was exactly like he'd said: wet, immense, timbered, mountainous, cold, exhilarating, challenging. The ferry nosed in at the pier on Alaskan Way and immediately I saw the totem poles in old stores and the ancient 1880-style switch goat with sleepy firemen chug chugging up and down the waterfront spur like a scene from my own dreams, the old Casey Jones locomotive of America, the only one I ever saw that old outside of Western movies, but actually working and hauling boxcars in the smoky gloom of the magic city.

I immediately went to a good clean skid row hotel, the Hotel Stevens, got a room for the night for a dollar seventy-five and had a hot tub bath and a good long sleep and in the morning I shaved and walked out First Avenue and acciden-


222  

tally found all kinds of Goodwill stores with wonderful sweaters and red underwear for sale and I had a big breakfast with five-cent coffee in the crowded market morning with blue sky and clouds scudding overhead and waters of Puget Sound sparkling and dancing under old piers. It was real true Northwest. At noon I checked out of the hotel, with my new wool socks and bandanas and things all packed in gladly, and walked out to 99 a few miles out of town and got many short rides.

Now I was beginning to see the Cascades on the northeast horizon, unbelievable jags and twisted rock and snow-covered immensities, enough to make you gulp. The road ran right through the dreamy fertile valleys of the Stilaquamish and the. Skagit, rich butterfat valleys with farms and cows browsing under that tremendous background of snow-pure heaps. The further north I hitched the bigger the mountains got till I finally began to feel afraid. I got a ride from a fellow who looked like a bespectacled careful lawyer in a conservative car, but turned out he was the famous Bat Lindstrom the hardtop racing champion and his conservative automobile had in it a souped-up motor that could make it go a hundred and seventy miles an hour. But he just demonstrated it by gunning it at a red light to let me hear the deep hum of power. Then I got a ride from a lumberman who said he knew the forest rangers where I was going and said "The Skagit Valley is second only to the Nile for fertility." He left me off at Highway i-G, which was the little highway to I7-A that wound into the heart of the mountains and in fact would come to a dead-end as a dirt road at Diablo Dam. Now I was really in the mountain country. The fellows who picked me up were loggers, uranium prospectors, farmers, they drove me through


223

the final big town of Skagit Valley, Sedro Woolley, a farming market town, and then out as the road got narrower and more curved among cliffs and the Skagit River, which we'd crossed on 99 as a dreaming belly river with meadows on both sides, was now a pure torrent of  melted snow pouring narrow and fast between muddy snag shores. Cliffs began to appear on both sides. The snow-covered mountains themselves had disappeared, receded from my view, I couldn't see them any more but now I was beginning to feel them more.

32
In an old tavern I saw an old decrepit man who could hardly move around to get me a beer behind the bar, I thought "I'd rather die in a glacial cave than in an eternity afternoon room of dust like this." A Min V Bill couple left me off at a grocery store in Sauk and there I got my final ride from a mad drunk fastswerving dark lorig-sideburned guitar-playing Skagit Valley wrangler who came to a dusty flying stop at the Marblemount Ranger Station and had me home.

The assistant ranger was standing there watching. "Are you Smith?"

"Yeah."

"That a friend of yours?"

"No, just a ride he gave me."


224 

 "Who does he think he is speeding on government property."

I gulped, I wasn't a free bhikku any more. Not until I'd get to my hideaway mountain that next week. I had to spend a whole week at Fire School with whole bunches of young kids, all of us in tin hats which we wore either straight on our heads or as I did at a rakish tilt, and we dug fire lines in the wet woods or felled trees or put out experimental small fires and I met the oldtimer ranger and onetime logger Burnie Byers, the "lumberjack" that Japhy was always imitating with his big deep funny voice.

Burnie and I sat in his truck in the woods and discussed Japhy. "It's a damn shame Japhy ain't come back this year. He was the best lookout we ever had and by God he was the best trailworker I ever seen. Just eager and anxious to go climbin around and so durn cheerful, I ain't never seen a better kid. And he wasn't afraid of nobody, he'd just come right out with it. That's what I like, cause when the time comes when a man can't say whatever he pleases I guess that'll be when I'm gonna go up in the backcountry and finish my life out in a lean-to. One thing about Japhy, though, wherever he'll be all the resta his life, I don't care how old he gets, he'll always have a good time." Burnie was about sixty-five and really spoke very paternally about Japhy. Some of the other kids also remembered Japhy and wondered why he wasn't back. That night, because it was Burnie's fortieth anniversary in the Forest Service, the other rangers voted him a gift, which was a brand new big leather belt. Old Burnie was always having trouble with belts and was wearing a kind of cord at the time. So he put on his new belt and said something funny about how he'd better not eat too much and everybody applauded and cheered. I figured


 225

Burnie and Japhy were probably the two best men that had ever worked in this country.

After Fire School I spent some time hiking up the mountains in back of the Ranger Station or just sitting by the rushing Skagit with my pipe in my mouth and a bottle of wine between my crossed legs, afternoons and also moonlit nights, while the other kids went beering at local carnivals. The Skagit River at Marblemount was a rushing clear snowmelt of pure green; above, Pacific Northwest pines were shrouded in clouds; and further beyond were peak tops with clouds going right through them and then fitfully the sun would shine through. It was the work of the quiet mountains, this torrent of purity at my feet. The sun shined on the roils, fighting snags held on. Birds scouted over the water looking for secret smiling fish that only occasionally suddenly leaped flying out of the water and arched their backs and fell in again into water that rushed on and obliterated their loophole, and everything was swept along. Logs and snags came floating down at twenty-five miles an hour. I figured if I should try to swim across the narrow river I'd be a half-mile downstream before I kicked to the other shore. It was a river wonderland, the emptiness of the golden eternity, odors of moss and bark and twigs and mud, all ululating mysterious visionstuff before my eyes, tranquil and everlasting nevertheless, the hillhairing trees, the dancing sunlight. As I looked up the clouds assumed, as I assumed, faces of hermits. The pine boughs looked satisfied washing in the waters. The top trees shrouded in gray fog looked content. The jiggling sunshine leaves of Northwest breeze seemed bred to rejoice. The upper snows on the horizon, the trackless, seemed cradled and warm. Everything was everlastingly loose and responsive, it was all everywhere be-


226 

yond the truth, beyond emptyspace blue. "The mountains are mighty patient, Buddha-man," I said out loud and took a drink. It was coldish, but when the sun peeped out the tree stump I was sitting on turned into a red oven. When I went back in the moonlight to my same old tree stump the world was like a dream, like a phantom, like a bubble, like a shadow, like a vanishing dew, like a lightning's flash.

Time came finally for me to be packed up into my mountain. I bought forty-five dollars' worth of groceries on credit in the little Marblemount grocery store and we packed that in the truck, Happy the muleskinner and I, and drove on up the river to Diablo Dam. As we proceeded the Skagit got narrower and more like a torrent, finally it was crashing over rocks and being fed by side-falls of water from heavy timbered shores, it was getting wilder and craggier all the time. The Skagit River was dammed back at Newhalem, then again at Diablo Dam, where a giant Pittsburgh-type lift took you up on a platform to the level of Diablo Lake. There'd been a gold rush in the 1890S in this country, the prospectors had built a trail through the solid rock cliffs of the gorge between Newhalem and what was now Ross Lake, the final dam, and dotted the drainages of Ruby Creek, Granite Creek, and Canyon Creek with claims that never paid off. Now most of this trail was under water anyway. In 1919 a fire had raged in the Upper Skagit and all the country around Desolation, my mountain, had burned and burned for two months and filled the skies of northern Washington and British Columbia with smoke that blotted out the sun. The government had tried to fight it, sent a thousand men in with pack string supply lines that then took three weeks from Marblemount fire camp, but only the fall rains had stopped that blaze and the charred


   227

snags, I was told, were still standing on Desolation Peak and in some valleys. That was the reason for the name: Desolation.

"Boy," said funny old Happy the muleskinner, who still wore his old floppy cowboy hat from Wyoming days and rolled his own butts and kept making jokes, "don't be like the kid we had a few years ago up on Desolation, we took him up there and he was the greenest kid I ever saw, I packed him into his lookout and he tried to fry an egg for supper and broke it and missed the friggin fryingpan and missed the stove and it landed on his boot, he didn't know whether to run shit or go blind and when I left I told him not to flog his damn dummy too much and the sucker says to me 'Yes sir, yes sir.'"

"Well I don't care, all I want is to be alone up there this summer."

"You're sayin that now but you'll change your tune soon enough. They all talk brave. But then you get to talkin to yourself. That ain't so bad but don't start anywerin yourself, son." Old Happy drove the pack mules on the gorge trail while I rode the boat from Diablo Dam, to the foot of Ross Dam where you could see immense dazzling openings of vistas that showed the Mount Baker National Forest mountains in wide panorama around Ross Lake that extended shiningly all the way back to Canada. At Ross Dam the Forest Service floats were lashed a little way off from the steep timbered shore. It was hard sleeping on those bunks at night, they swayed with the float and the log and the wave combined to make a booming slapping noise that kept you awake.

The moon was full the night I slept there, it was dancing on the waters. One of the lookouts said "The moon is right


229


228

 


on the mountain, when I see that I always imagine I see a coyote silhouettin."

Finally came the gray rainy day of my departure to Desolation Peak. The assistant ranger was with us, the three of us were going up and it wasn't going to be a pleasant day's horseback riding in all that downpour. "Boy, you shoulda put a couple quarts of brandy in your grocery list, you're gonna need it up there in the cold," said Happy looking at me with his big red nose. We were standing by the corral, Happy was giving the animals bags of feed and tying it around their necks and they were chomping away unmindful of the rain. We came plowing to the log gate and bumped through and went around under the immense shrouds of Sourdough and Ruby mountains. The waves were crashing up and spraying back at us. We went inside to the pilot's cabin and he had a pot of coffee ready. Firs on steep banks you could barely see on the lake shore were like ranged ghosts in the mist. It was the real Northwest grim and bitter misery.

"Where's Desolation?" I asked.

"You ain't about to see it today till you're practically on top of it," said Happy, "and then you won't like it much. It's snowin and hailin up there right now. Boy, ain't you sure you didn't sneak a little bottle of brandy in your pack somewheres?" We'd already downed a quart of blackberry wine he'd bought in Marblemount.

"Happy when I get down from this mountain in September I'll buy you a whole quart of scotch." I was going to be paid good money for finding the mountain I wanted.

"That's a promise and don't you forget it." Japhy had told me a lot about Happy the Packer, he was called. Happy was a good man; he and old Burnie Byers were the best old-


229

timers on the scene. They knew the mountains and they knew pack animals and they weren't ambitious to become forestry supervisors either.

Happy remembered Japhy too, wistfully. "That boy used to know an awful lot of funny songs and stuff. He shore loved to go out loggin out trails. He had himself a Chinee girlfriend one rime down in Seattle, I seen her in his hotel room, that Japhy I'm tellin you he shore was a grunge-jumper with the women." I could hear Japhy's voice singing gay songs with his guitar as the wind howled around our barge and the gray waves plashed up against the windows of the pilot house.

"And this is Japhy's lake, and these are Japhy's mountains," I thought, and wished Japhy were there to see me doing everything he wanted me to do.

In two hours we eased over to the steep timbered shore eight miles uplake and jumped off and lashed the float to old stumps and Happy whacked the first mule, and she scampered off the wood with her doublesided load and charged up the slippery bank, legs thrashing and almost falling back in the lake with all my groceries, but made it and went off clomping in the mist to wait on the trail for her master. Then the other mules with batteries and various equipment, then finally Happy leading the way on his horse and then myself on the mare Mabel and then Wally the assistant ranger.

We waved goodbye to the tugboat man and started up a sad and dripping party in a hard Arctic climb in heavy foggy rain up narrow rocky trails with trees and underbrush wetting us clean to the skin when we brushed by. I had my nylon poncho tied around the pommel of the saddle and soon took it out and put it over me, a shroudy monk on a horse. Happy and Wally didn't put on anything and just rode wet with heads


230   

bowed. The horse slipped occasionally in the rocks of the trail. We went on and on, up and up, and finally we came to a snag that had fallen across the trail and Happy dismounted and took out his doublebitted ax and went to work cursing and sweating and hacking out a new shortcut trail around it with Wally while I was delegated to watch the animals, which I did in a rather comfortable way sitting under a bush and rolling a cigarette. The mules were afraid of the steepness and roughness of the shortcut trail and Happy cursed at me "Goddammit it grab 'im by the hair and drag 'im up here." Then the mare was afraid. "Bring up that mare! You expect me to do everything around here by myself?"

We finally got out of there and climbed on up, soon leaving the shrubbery and entering a new alpine height of rocky meadow with blue lupine and red poppy feathering the gray mist with lovely vaguenesses of color and the wind blowing hard now and with sleet. "Five thousand feet now!" yelled Happy from up front, turning in the saddle with his old hat furling in the wind, rolling himself a cigarette, sitting easy in his saddle from a whole lifetime on horses. The heather wild-flower drizzly meadows wound up and up, on switchback trails, the wind getting harder all the time, finally Happy yelled: "See that big rock face up thar?" I looked up and saw a goopy shroud of gray rock in the fog, just above. "That's another thousand feet though you might think you can reach up and touch it. When we get there we're almost in. Only another half hour after that."

"You sure you didn't bring just a little extry bottle of brandy boy?" he yelled back a minute later. He was wet and miserable but he didn't care and I could hear him singing in the wind. By and by we were up above timberline practically,


 231

the meadow gave way to grim rocks and suddenly there was snow on the ground to the right and to the left, the horses were slowshing in a sleety foot of it, you could see the water holes their hoofs left, we were really way up there now. Yet on all sides I could see nothing but fog and white snow and blowing mists. On a clear day I would have been able to see the sheer drops from the side of the trail and would have been scared for my horse's slips of hoof; but now all I saw were vague intimations of treetops way below that looked like little clumps of grasses. "O Japhy," I thought, "and there you are sailing across the ocean safe on a ship, warm in a cabin, writing letters to Psyche and Sean and Christine."

The snow deepened and hail began to pelt our red weather-beaten faces and finally Happy yelled from up ahead "We're almost there now." I was cold and wet: I got off the horse and simply led her up the trail, she grunted a kind of groan of relief to be rid of the weight and followed me obediently. She already had quite a load of supplies, anyway. "There she is!" yelled Happy and in the swirled-across top-of-the-world fog I saw a funny little peaked almost Chinese cabin among little pointy firs and boulders standing on a bald rock top surrounded by snowbanks and patches of wet grass with tiny flowers.

I gulped. It was too dark and dismal to like it. "This will be my home and restingplace all summer?"

We trudged on to the log corral built by some old lookout of the thirties and tethered the animals and took down the packs. Happy went up and took the weather door off and got the keys and opened her up and inside it was all gray dank gloomy muddy floor with rain-stained walls and a dismal wooden bunk with a mattress made of ropes (so as not to at-


232    

tract lightning) and the windows completely impenetrable with dust and worst of all the floor littered with magazines torn and chewed up by mice and pieces of groceries too and uncountable little black balls of rat turd.

"Well," said Wally showing his long teeth at me, "it's gonna take you a long time to clean up this mess, hey? Start in right now by taking all those leftover canned goods off the shelf and running a wet soapy rag over that filthy shelf." Which I did, and I had to do, I was getting paid.

But good old Happy got a roaring woodfire going in the potbelly stove and put on a pot of water and dumped half a can of coffee in it and yelled "Ain't nothing like real strong coffee, up in this country boy we want coffee that'll make your hair stand on end."

I looked out the windows: fog. "How high are we?"

"Six thousand and a half feet."

"Well how can I see any fires? There's nothing but fog out there."

"In a couple of days it'll all blow away and you'll be able to see for a hundred miles in every direction, don't worry."

But I didn't believe it. I remembered Han Shan talking about the fog on Cold Mountain, how it never went away; I began to appreciate Han Shan's hardihood. Happy and Wally went out with me and we spent some time putting up the anemometer pole and doing other chores, then Happy went in and started a crackling supper on the stove frying Spam with eggs. We drank coffee deep, and had a rich good meal. Wally unpacked the two-way battery radio and contacted Ross Float. Then they curled up in their sleeping bags for a night's rest, on the floor, while I slept on the damp bunk in my own bag.


233

In the morning it was still gray fog and wind. They got the animals ready and before leaving turned and said to me, "Well, do you still like Desolation Peak?"

And Happy: "Don't forget what I told ya about answerin your own questions now. And if a bar comes by and looks in your window just close your eyes."

The windows howled as they rode out of sight in the mist among the gnarled rock-top trees and pretty soon I couldn't see them any more and I was alone on Desolation Peak for all I knew for eternity, I was sure I wasn't going to come out of there alive anyway. I was trying to see the mountains but only occasional gaps in the blowing fog would reveal distant dim shapes. I gave up and went in and spent a whole day cleaning out the mess in the cabin.

At night I put on my poncho over my rain jacket and warm clothing and went out to meditate on the foggy top of the world. Here indeed was the Great Truth Cloud, Dharmamega, the ultimate goal. I began to see my first star at ten, and suddenly some of the white mist parted and I thought I saw mountains, immense black gooky shapes across the way, stark black and white with snow on top, so near, suddenly, I almost jumped. At eleven I could see the evening star over Canada, north way, and thought I could detect an orange sash of sunset behind the fog but all this was taken out of my mind by the sound of pack rats scratching at my cellar door. In the attic little diamond mice skittered on black feet among oats and bits of rice and old rigs left up there by a generation of Desolation losers. "Ugh, ow," I thought, "will I get to like this? And if I don't, how do I get to leave?" The only thing was to go to bed and stick my head under the down.

In the middle of the night while half asleep I had appar-


234

ently opened my eyes a bit, and then suddenly I woke up with my hair standing on end, I had just seen a huge black monster standing in my window, and I looked, and it had a star over it, and it was Mount Hozomeen miles away by Canada leaning over my backyard and staring in my window. The fog had all blown away and it was perfect starry night. What a mountain! It had that same unmistakable witches' tower shape Japhy had given it in his brush drawing of it that used to hang on the burlap wall in the flowery shack in Corte Madera. It was built with a kind of winding rock-ledge road going around and around, spiraling to the very top where a perfect witches' tower peakied up and pointed to all infinity. Hozomeen, Hozomeen, the most mournful mountain I ever seen, and the most beautiful as soon as I got to know it and saw the Northern Lights behind it reflecting all the ice of the North Pole from the other side of the world.

33
Lo, in the morning I woke up and it was beautiful blue sunshine sky and I went out in my alpine yard and there it was, everything Japhy said it was, hundreds of miles of pure snow-covered rocks and virgin lakes and high timber, and below, instead of the world, I saw a sea of marshmallow clouds flat as a roof and extending miles and miles in every direction,


235

creaming all the valleys, what they call low-level clouds, on my 66oo-foot pinnacle it was all far below me. I brewed coffee on the stove and came out and warmed my mist-drenched bones in the hot sun of my little woodsteps. I said "Tee tee" to a big furry cony and he calmly enjoyed a minute with me gazing at the sea of clouds. I made bacon and eggs, dug a garbage pit a hundred yards down the trail, hauled wood and identified landmarks with my panoramic and firefinder and named all the magic rocks and clefts, names Japhy had sung to me so often: Jack Mountain, Mount Terror, Mount Fury, Mount Challenger, Mount Despair, Golden Horn, Sourdough, Crater Peak, Ruby, Mount Baker bigger than the world in the western distance, Jackass Mountain, Crooked Thumb Peak, and the fabulous names of the creeks: Three Fools, Cinnamon, Trouble, Lightning and Freezeout. And it was all mine, not another human pair of eyes in the world were looking at this immense cycloramic universe of matter. I had a tremendous sensation of its dreamlikeness which never left me all that summer and in fact grew and grew, especially when I stood on my head to circulate my blood, right on top of the mountain, using a burlap bag for a head mat, and then the mountains looked like little bubbles hanging in the void upsidedown. In fact I realized they were upsidedown and I was upside-down! There was nothing here to hide the fact of gravity holding us all intact upsidedown against a surface globe of earth in infinite empty space. And suddenly I realized I was truly alone and had nothing to do but feed myself and rest and amuse myself, and nobody could criticize. The little flowers grew everywhere around the rocks, and no one had asked them to grow, or me to grow. In the afternoon the marshmallow roof of clouds blew away


236

in patches and Ross Lake was open to my sight, a beautiful cerulean pool far below with tiny toy boats of vacationists, the boats themselves too far to see, just the pitiful little tracks they left rilling in the mirror lake. You could see pines reflected upsidedown in the lake pointing to infinity. Late afternoon I lay in the grass with all that glory before me and grew a little bored and thought "There's nothing there because I don't care." Then I jumped up and began singing and dancing and whistling through my teeth far across Lightning Gorge and it was too immense for an echo. Behind the shack was a huge snowfield that would provide me with fresh drinking water till September, just a bucket a day let melt in the house, to dip into with a tin cup, cold ice water. I was feeling happier than in years and years, since childhood, I felt deliberate and glad and solitary. "Buddy-o, yiddam, diddam dee," I sang, walking around kicking rocks. Then my first sunset came and it was unbelievable. The mountains were covered with pink snow, the clouds were distant and frilly and like ancient remote cities of Buddhaland splendor, the wind worked incessantly, whish, whish, booming at times, rattling my ship. The new moon disk was prognathic and secretly funny in the pale plank of blue over the monstrous shoulders of haze that rose from Ross Lake. Sharp jags popped up from behind slopes, like childhood mountains I grayly drew. Somewhere, it seemed, a golden festival of rejoicement was taking place. In my diary I wrote, "Oh I'm happy!" In the late day peaks I saw the hope. Japhy had been right.

As darkness enveloped my mountain and soon it would be night again and stars and Abominable Snowman stalking on Hozomeen, I started a cracking fire in the stove and baked delicious rye muffins and mixed up a good beef stew. A high west


 237

wind buffeted the shack, it was well built with steel rods going down into concrete pourings, it wouldn't blow away. I was satisfied. Every time I'd look out the windows I'd see alpine firs with snowcapped backgrounds, blinding mists, or the lake below all riffled and moony like a toy bathtub lake. I made myself a little bouquet of lupine and mountain posies and put them in a coffee cup with water. The top of Jack Mountain was done in by silver clouds. Sometimes I'd see flashes of lightning far away, illuminating suddenly the unbelievable horizons. Some mornings there was fog and my ridge, Starvation Ridge, would be milkied over completely.

On the dot the following Sunday morning, just like the first, daybreak revealed the sea of flat shining clouds a thousand feet below me. Every time I felt bored I rolled another cigarette out of my can of Prince Albert; there's nothing better in the world than a roll-your-own deeply enjoyed without hurry. I paced in the bright silver stillness with pink horizons in the west, and all the insects ceased in honor of the moon. There were days that were hot and miserable with locusts of plagues of insects, winged ants, heat, no air, no clouds, I couldn't understand how the top of a mountain in the North could be so hot. At noon the only sound in the world was the symphonic hum of a million insects, my friends. But night would come and with it the mountain moon and the lake would be moon-laned and I'd go out and sit in the grass and meditate facing west, wishing there were a Personal God in all this impersonal matter. I'd go out to my snowfield and dig out my jar of purple Jello and look at the white moon through it. I could feel the world rolling toward the moon. At night while I was in my bag, the deer would come up from the lower timber and nibble at leftovers in tin plates in the yard: bucks with wide antlers,


238      

does, and cute little fawns looking like otherworldly mammals on another planet with all that moonlight rock behind them.

Then would come wild lyrical drizzling rain, from the south, in the wind, and I'd say "The taste of rain, why kneel?" and I'd say "Time for hot coffee and a cigarette, boys," addressing my imaginary bhikkus. The moon became full and huge and with it came Aurora Borealis over Mount Hozomeen ("Look at the void and it is even stiller," Han Shan had said in Japhy's translation); and in fact I was so still all I had to do was shift my crossed legs in the alpine grass and I could hear the hoofs of deers running away somewhere. Standing on my head before bedtime on that rock roof of the moonlight I could indeed see that the earth was truly upsidedown and man a weird vain beetle full of strange ideas walking around upsidedown and boasting, and I could realize that man remembered why this dream of planets and plants and Plantagenets was built out of the primordial essence. Sometimes I'd get mad because things didn't work out well, I'd spoil a flapjack, or slip in the snowfield while getting water, or one time my shovel went sailing down into the gorge, and I'd be so mad I'd want to bite the mountaintops and would come in the shack and kick the cupboard and hurt my toe. But let the mind beware, that though the flesh be bugged, the circumstances of existence are pretty glorious.

All I had to do was keep an eye on all horizons for smoke and run the two-way radio and sweep the floor. The radio didn't bother me much; there were no fires close enough for me to report ahead of anybody else and I didn't participate in the lookout chats. They dropped me a couple of radio


 239

batteries by parachute but my own batteries were still in good shape.

One night in a meditation vision Avalokitesvara the Hearer and Answerer of Prayer said to me "You are empowered to remind people that they are utterly free" so I laid my hand on myself to remind myself first and then felt gay, yelled "Ta," opened my eyes, and a shooting star shot. The innumerable worlds in the Milky Way, words. I ate my soup in little doleful bowlfuls and it tasted much better than in some vast tureen . . . my Japhy pea-and-bacon soup. I took two-hour naps every afternoon, waking up and realizing "none of this ever happened" as I looked around my mountaintop. The world was upsidedown hanging in an ocean of endless space and here were all these people sitting in theaters watching movies, down there in the world to which I would return. . . . Pacing in the yard at dusk, singing "Wee Small Hours," when I came to the lines "when the whole wide world is fast asleep" my eyes filled with tears. "Okay world," I said, "I'll love ya." In bed at night, warm and happy in my bag on the good hemp bunk, I'd see my table and my clothes in the moonlight and feel, "Poor Raymond boy, his day is so sorrowful and worried, his reasons are so ephemeral, it's such a haunted and pitiful thing to have to live" and on this I'd go to sleep like a lamb. Are we fallen angels who didn't want to believe that nothing is nothing and so were born to lose our loved ones and dear friends one by one and finally our own life, to see it proved? . . . But cold morning would return, with clouds billowing out of Lightning Gorge like giant smoke, the lake below still cerulean neutral, and empty space the same as ever. O gnashing teeth of earth, where would it all lead to but


240

some sweet golden eternity, to prove that we've all been wrong, to prove that the proving itself was nil ...

34
August finally came in with a blast that shook my house and augured little augusticity. I made raspberry Jello the color of rubies in the setting sun. Mad raging sunsets poured in seafoams of cloud through unimaginable crags, with every rose tint of hope beyond, I felt just like it, brilliant and bleak beyond words. Everywhere awful ice fields and snow straws; one blade of grass jiggling in the winds of infinity, anchored to a rock. To the east, it was gray; to the north, awful; to the west, raging mad, hard iron fools wrestling in the groomian gloom; to the south, my father's mist. Jack Mountain, his thousand-foot rock hat overlooked a hundred football fields of snow. Cinnamon Creek was an eyrie of Scottish fog. Shull lost itself in the Golden Horn of Bleak. My oil lamp burned in infinity. "Poor gentle flesh," I realized, "there is nc answer." I didn't know anything any more, I didn't care, and it didn't matter, and suddenly I felt really free. Then would come really freezing mornings, cracking fire, I'd chop wood with my hat on (earmuff cap), and would feel lazy and wonderful indoors, fogged in by icy clouds. Rain, thunder in the mountains, but in front of the stove I read my Western maga-


  241

zines. Everywhere snowy air and woodsmoke. Finally the snow came, in a whirling shroud from Hozomeen by Canada, it came surling my way sending radiant white heralds through which I saw the angel of light peep, and the wind rose, dark low clouds rushed up as out of a forge, Canada was a sea of meaningless mist; it came in a general fanning attack advertised by the sing in my stovepipe; it rammed it, to absorb my old blue sky view which had been all thoughtful clouds of gold; far, the rum dum dum of Canadian thunder; and to the south another vaster darker storm closing in like a pincer; but Hozomeen mountain stood there returning the attack with a surl of silence. And nothing could induce the gay golden horizons far northeast where there was no storm, to change places with Desolation. Suddenly a green and rose rainbow shafted right down into Starvation Ridge not three hundred yards away from my door, like a bolt, like a pillar: it came among steaming clouds and orange sun turmoiling.

What is a rainbow, Lord?

A hoop

For the lowly.

It hooped right into Lightning Creek, rain and snow fell simultaneous, the lake was milkwhite a mile below, it was just too crazy. I went outside and suddenly my shadow was ringed by the rainbow as I walked on the hilltop, a lovely-haloed mystery making me want to pray. "O Ray, the career of your life is like a raindrop in the illimitable ocean which is eternal awakenerhood. Why worry ever any more? Write and tell Japhy that." The storm went away as swiftly as it came and the late afternoon lake-sparkle blinded me. Late afternoon, my mop drying on the rock. Late afternoon, my bare back cold as I stood above the world in a snowfield digging shovelsful


242 

into a pail. Late afternoon, it was I not the void that changed. Warm rose dusk, I meditated in the yellow half moon of August. Whenever I heard thunder in the mountains it was like the iron of my mother's love. "Thunder and snow, how we shall go!" I'd sing. Suddenly came the drenching fall rains, all-night rain, millions of acres of Bo-trees being washed and washed, and in my attic millennial rats wisely sleeping.

Morning, the definite feel of autumn coming, the end of my job coming, wild windy cloud-crazed days now, a definite golden look in the high noon haze. Night, made hot cocoa and sang by the woodfire. I called Han Shan in the mountains: there was no answer. I called Han Shan in the morning fog: silence, it said. I called: Dipankara instructed me by saying nothing. Mists blew by, I closed my eyes, the stove did the talking. "Woo!" I yelled, and the bird of perfect balance on the fir point just moved his tail; then he was gone and distance grew immensely white. Dark wild nights with hint of bears: down in my garbage pit old soured solidified cans of evaporated milk bitten into and torn apart by mighty behemoth paws: Avalokitesvara the Bear. Wild cold fogs with awesome holes. On my calendar I ringed off the fifty-fifth day.

My hair was long, my eyes pure blue in the mirror, my skin tanned and happy. All night gales of soaking rain again, autumn rain, but I warm as toast in my bag dreaming of long infantry-scouting movements in the mountains; cold wild morning with high wind, racing fogs, racing clouds, sudden bright suns, the pristine light on hill patches and my fire roaring with three big logs as I exulted to hear Burnie Byers over the radio telling all his lookouts to come down that very day. The season was over. I paced in the windy yard with cup of coffee forked in my thumb singing "Blubbery dubbery the


 243

chipmunk's in the grass." There he was, my chipmunk, in the bright clear windy sunny air staring on the rock; hands clasping he sat up straight, some little oat between his paws; he nibbled, he darted away, the little nutty lord of all he surveyed. At dusk, big wall of clouds from the north coming in. "Brrr," I said. And I'd sing "Yar, but my she was yar!" meaning my shack all summer, how the wind hadn't blown it away, and I said "Pass pass pass, that which passes through everything!" Sixty sunsets had I seen revolve on that perpendicular hill. The vision of the freedom of eternity was mine forever. The chipmunk ran into the rocks and a butterfly came out. It was as simple as that. Birds flew over the shack rejoicing; they had a mile-long patch of sweet blueberries all the way down to the timberline. For the last time I went out to the edge of Lightning Gorge where the little outhouse was built right on the precipice of a steep gulch. Here, sitting every day for sixty days, in fog or in moonlight or in sunny day or in darkest night, I had always seen the little twisted gnarly trees that seemed to grow right out of the midair rock.

And suddenly it seemed I saw that unimaginable little Chinese bum standing there, in the fog, with that expressionless humor on his seamed face. It wasn't the real-life Japhy of rucksacks and Buddhism studies and big mad parties at Corte Madera, it was the realer-than-life Japhy of my dreams, and he stood there saying nothing. "Go away, thieves of the mind!" he cried down the hollows of the unbelievable Cascades. It was Japhy who had advised me to come here and now though he was seven thousand miles away in Japan answering the meditation bell (a little bell he later sent to my mother in the mail, just because she was my mother, a gift to please her) he seemed to be standing on Desolation Peak by the gnarled old


244    

rocky trees certifying and justifying all that was here. "Japhy," I said out loud, "I don't know when we'll meet again or what'll happen in the future, but Desolation, Desolation, I owe so much to Desolation, thank you forever for guiding me to the place where I learned all. Now comes the sadness of coming back to cities and I've grown two months older and there's all that humanity of bars and burlesque shows and gritty love, all upsidedown in the void God bless them, but Japhy you and me forever we know, O ever youthful, O ever weeping." Down on the lake rosy reflections of celestial vapor appeared, and I said "God, I love you" and looked up to the sky and really meant it. "I have fallen in love with you, God. Take care of us all, one way or the other."

To the children and the innocent it's all the same.

And in keeping with Japhy's habit of always getting down on one knee and delivering a little prayer to the camp we left, to the one in the Sierra, and the others in Marin, and the little prayer of gratitude he had delivered to Sean's shack the day he sailed away, as I was hiking down the mountain with my pack I turned and knelt on the trail and said "Thank you, shack." Then I added "Blah," with a little grin, because I knew that shack and that mountain would understand what that meant, and turned and went on down the trail back to this world.

